she shall wed. Yet, if not so inclined, ye rather chuse That he should live and occupy entire His patrimony, then, no longer, here Assembled, let us revel at his cost, But let us all with spousal gifts produced From our respective treasures, woo the Queen, Leaving her in full freedom to espouse 460 Who proffers most, and whom the fates ordain. He ceased; the assembly silent sat and mute. Then rose Amphinomus amid them all, Offspring renown'd of Nisus, son, himself, Of King Aretias. He had thither led The suitor train who from the pleasant isle Corn-clad of green Dulichium had arrived, And by his speech pleased far beyond them all Penelope, for he was just and wise, And thus, well-counselling the rest, began. 470 Not I, my friends! far be the thought from me To slay Telemachus! it were a deed Momentous, terrible, to slay a prince. First, therefore, let us counsel ask of heav'n, And if Jove's oracle that course approve, I will encourage you, and will myself Be active in his death; but if the Gods Forbid it, then, by my advice, forbear. So spake Amphinomus, whom all approved. Arising then, into Ulysses' house 480 They went, where each his splendid seat resumed. A novel purpose occupied, meantime, Penelope; she purposed to appear Before her suitors, whose design to slay Telemachus she had from Medon learn'd, The herald, for his ear had caught the sound. Toward the hall with her attendant train She moved, and when, most graceful of her sex, Where sat the suitors she arrived, between The columns standing of the stately dome, 490 And covering with her white veil's lucid folds Her features, to Antinoüs thus she spake. Antinoüs, proud, contentious, evermore To mischief prone! the people deem thee wise Past thy compeers, and in all grace of speech Pre-eminent, but such wast never thou. Inhuman! why is it thy dark design To slay Telemachus? and why with scorn Rejectest thou the suppliant's pray'r,[72] which Jove Himself hath witness'd? Plots please not the Gods. 500 Know'st not that thy own father refuge found Here, when he fled before the people's wrath Whom he had irritated by a wrong Which, with a band of Taphian robbers joined, He offer'd to the Thesprots, our allies? They would have torn his heart, and would have laid All his delights and his possessions waste, But my Ulysses slaked the furious heat Of their revenge, whom thou requitest now Wasting his goods, soliciting his wife, 510 Slaying his son, and filling me with woe. But cease, I charge thee, and bid cease the rest. To whom the son of Polybus replied, Eurymachus.--Icarius' daughter wise! Take courage, fair Penelope, and chace These fears unreasonable from thy mind! The man lives not, nor shall, who while I live, And faculty of sight retain, shall harm Telemachus, thy son. For thus I say, And thus will I perform; his blood shall stream 520 A sable current from my lance's point That moment; for the city-waster Chief Ulysses, oft, me placing on his knees, Hath fill'd my infant grasp with sav'ry food, And giv'n me ruddy wine. I, therefore, hold Telemachus of all men most my friend, Nor hath he death to fear from hand of ours. Yet, if the Gods shall doom him, die he must. So he encouraged her, who yet, himself, Plotted his death. She, re-ascending, sought 530 Her stately chamber, and, arriving there, Deplored with tears her long-regretted Lord Till Athenæan Pallas azure-eyed Dews of soft slumber o'er her lids diffused. And now, at even-tide, Eumæus reach'd Ulysses and his son. A yearling swine Just slain they skilfully for food prepared, When Pallas, drawing nigh, smote with her wand Ulysses, at the stroke rend'ring him old, And his apparel sordid as before, 540 Lest, knowing him, the swain at once should seek Penelope, and let the secret forth. Then foremost him Telemachus address'd. Noble Eumæus! thou art come; what news Bring'st from the city? Have the warrior band Of suitors, hopeless of their ambush, reach'd The port again, or wait they still for me? To whom Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. No time for such enquiry, nor to range, Curious, the streets had I, but anxious wish'd 550 To make my message known, and to return. But, as it chanced, a nimble herald sent From thy companions, met me on the way, Who reach'd thy mother first. Yet this I know, For this I saw. Passing above the town Where they have piled a way-side hill of stones To Mercury, I beheld a gallant bark Ent'ring the port; a bark she was of ours, The crew were num'rous, and I mark'd her deep- Laden with shields and spears of double edge. 560 Theirs I conjectured her, and could no more. He spake, and by Eumæus unperceived, Telemachus his father eyed and smiled. Their task accomplish'd, and the table spread, They ate, nor any his due portion miss'd, And hunger, now, and thirst both sated, all To rest repair'd, and took the gift of sleep. FOOTNOTES: [72] Alluding probably to entreaties made to him at some former time by herself and Telemachus, that he would not harm them. Clarke. BOOK XVII ARGUMENT Telemachus returns to the city, and relates to his mother the principal passages of his voyage; Ulysses, conducted by Eumæus, arrives there also, and enters among the suitors, having been known only by his old dog Argus, who dies at his feet. The curiosity of Penelope being excited by the account which Eumæus gives her of Ulysses, she orders him immediately into her presence, but Ulysses postpones the interview till evening, when the suitors having left the palace, there shall be no danger of interruption. Eumæus returns to his cottage. Now look'd Aurora from the East abroad, When the illustrious offspring of divine Ulysses bound his sandals to his feet; He seiz'd his sturdy spear match'd to his gripe, And to the city meditating quick Departure now, the swine-herd thus bespake. Father! I seek the city, to convince My mother of my safe return, whose tears, I judge, and lamentation shall not cease Till her own eyes behold me. But I lay 10 On thee this charge. Into the city lead, Thyself, this hapless guest, that he may beg Provision there, a morsel and a drop From such as may, perchance, vouchsafe the boon. I cannot, vext and harass'd as I am, Feed all, and should the stranger take offence, The worse for him. Plain truth is my delight. To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. Nor is it my desire to be detained. Better the mendicant in cities seeks 20 His dole, vouchsafe it whosoever may, Than in the villages. I am not young, Nor longer of an age that well accords With rural tasks, nor could I all perform That it might please a master to command. Go then, and when I shall have warm'd my limbs Before the hearth, and when the risen sun Shall somewhat chase the cold, thy servant's task Shall be to guide me thither, as thou bidd'st, For this is a vile garb; the frosty air 30 Of morning would benumb me thus attired, And, as ye say, the city is remote. He ended, and Telemachus in haste Set forth, his thoughts all teeming as he went With dire revenge. Soon in the palace-courts Arriving, he reclined his spear against A column, and proceeded to the hall. Him Euryclea, first, his nurse, perceived, While on the variegated seats she spread Their fleecy cov'ring; swift with tearful eyes 40 She flew to him, and the whole female train Of brave Ulysses swarm'd around his son, Clasping him, and his forehead and his neck Kissing affectionate; then came, herself, As golden Venus or Diana fair, Forth from her chamber to her son's embrace, The chaste Penelope; with tears she threw Her arms around him, his bright-beaming eyes And forehead kiss'd, and with a murmur'd plaint Maternal, in wing'd accents thus began. 50 Thou hast return'd, light of my eyes! my son! My lov'd Telemachus! I had no hope To see thee more when once thou hadst embark'd For Pylus, privily, and with no consent From me obtain'd, news seeking of thy sire. But haste; unfold. Declare what thou hast seen. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. Ah mother! let my sorrows rest, nor me From death so lately 'scaped afflict anew, But, bathed and habited in fresh attire, 60 With all the maidens of thy train ascend To thy superior chamber, there to vow A perfect hecatomb to all the Gods, When Jove shall have avenged our num'rous wrongs. I seek the forum, there to introduce A guest, my follower from the Pylian shore, Whom sending forward with my noble band, I bade Piræus to his own abode Lead him, and with all kindness entertain The stranger, till I should myself arrive. 70 He spake, nor flew his words useless away. She, bathed and habited in fresh attire, Vow'd a full hecatomb to all the Gods, Would Jove but recompense her num'rous wrongs. Then, spear in hand, went forth her son, two dogs Fleet-footed following him. O'er all his form Pallas diffused a dignity divine, And ev'ry eye gazed on him as he pass'd. The suitors throng'd him round, joy on their lips And welcome, but deep mischief in their hearts. 80 He, shunning all that crowd, chose to himself A seat, where Mentor sat, and Antiphus, And Halytherses, long his father's friends Sincere, who of his voyage much enquired. Then drew Piræus nigh, leading his guest Toward the forum; nor Telemachus Stood long aloof, but greeted his approach, And was accosted by Piræus thus. Sir! send thy menial women to bring home The precious charge committed to my care, 90 Thy gifts at Menelaus' hands received. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. Piræus! wait; for I not yet foresee The upshot. Should these haughty ones effect My death, clandestine, under my own roof, And parcel my inheritance by lot, I rather wish those treasures thine, than theirs. But should I with success plan for them all A bloody death, then, wing'd with joy, thyself Bring home those presents to thy joyful friend. 100 So saying, he led the anxious stranger thence Into the royal mansion, where arrived, Each cast his mantle on a couch or throne, And plung'd his feet into a polish'd bath. There wash'd and lubricated with smooth oils, From the attendant maidens each received Tunic and shaggy mantle. Thus attired, Forth from the baths they stepp'd, and sat again. A maiden, next, with golden ewer charged, And silver bowl, pour'd water on their hands, 110 And spread the polish'd table, which with food Of all kinds, remnants of the last regale, The mistress of the household charge supplied. Meantime, beside a column of the dome His mother, on a couch reclining, twirl'd Her slender threads. They to the furnish'd board Stretch'd forth their hands, and, hunger now and thirst Both satisfied, Penelope began. Telemachus! I will ascend again, And will repose me on my woeful bed; 120 For such it hath been, and with tears of mine Ceaseless bedew'd, e'er since Ulysses went With Atreus' sons to Troy. For not a word Thou would'st vouchsafe me till our haughty guests Had occupied the house again, of all That thou hast heard (if aught indeed thou hast) Of thy long-absent father's wish'd return. Her answer'd then Telemachus discrete. Mother, at thy request I will with truth Relate the whole. At Pylus shore arrived 130 We Nestor found, Chief of the Pylian race. Receiving me in his august abode, He entertain'd me with such welcome kind As a glad father shews to his own son Long-lost and newly found; so Nestor me, And his illustrious offspring, entertain'd, But yet assured me that he nought had heard From mortal lips of my magnanimous sire, Whether alive or dead; with his own steeds He sent me, and with splendid chariot thence 140 To spear-famed Menelaus, Atreus' son. There saw I Helen, by the Gods' decree Auth'ress of trouble both to Greece and Troy. The Hero Menelaus then enquired What cause had urged me to the pleasant vale Of Lacedæmon; plainly I rehearsed The occasion, and the Hero thus replied. Ye Gods! they are ambitious of the bed Of a brave man, however base themselves. But, as it chances when the hart hath laid 150 Her fawns new-yean'd and sucklings yet, to rest In some resistless lion's den, she roams, Meantime, the hills, and in the grassy vales Feeds heedless, but the lion to his lair Returning soon, both her and hers destroys, So shall thy father, brave Ulysses, them. Jove! Pallas! and Apollo! oh that such As erst in well-built Lesbos, where he strove With Philomelides, whom wrestling, flat He threw, when all Achaia's sons rejoiced, 160 Ulysses, now, might mingle with his foes! Short life and bitter nuptials should be theirs, But thy enquiries neither indirect Will I evade, nor give thee false reply, But all that from the Ancient of the Deep[73] I have received will utter, hiding nought. The God declared that he had seen thy sire In a lone island, sorrowing, and detain'd An inmate in the grotto of the nymph Calypso, wanting also means by which 170 To reach the country of his birth again, For neither gallant barks nor friends had he To speed his passage o'er the boundless waves. So Menelaus spake, the spear-renown'd. My errand thus accomplish'd, I return'd-- And by the Gods with gales propitious blest, Was wafted swiftly to my native shore. He spake, and tumult in his mother's heart So speaking, raised. Consolatory, next, The godlike Theoclymenus began. 180 Consort revered of Laertiades! Little the Spartan knew, but list to me, For I will plainly prophesy and sure. Be Jove of all in heav'n my witness first, Then this thy hospitable board, and, last, The household Gods of the illustrious Chief Ulysses, at whose hearth I have arrived,[74] That, even now, within his native isle Ulysses somewhere sits, or creeps obscure, Witness of these enormities, and seeds 190 Sowing of dire destruction for his foes; So sure an augury, while on the deck Reclining of the gallant bark, I saw, And with loud voice proclaim'd it to thy son. Him answer'd then Penelope discrete. Grant heav'n, my guest, that this good word of thine Fail not! then shalt thou soon such bounty share And friendship at my hands, that at first sight Whoe'er shall meet thee shall pronounce thee blest. Thus they conferr'd. Meantime the suitors hurl'd 200 The quoit and lance on the smooth area spread Before Ulysses' gate, the custom'd scene Of their contentions, sports, and clamours rude. But when the hour of supper now approach'd, And from the pastures on all sides the sheep Came with their wonted drivers, Medon then (For he of all the heralds pleas'd them most, And waited at the board) them thus address'd. Enough of play, young princes! ent'ring now The house, prepare we sedulous our feast, 210 Since in well-timed refreshment harm is none. He spake, whose admonition pleas'd. At once All, rising, sought the palace; there arrived, Each cast his mantle off, which on his throne Or couch he spread, then, brisk, to slaughter fell Of many a victim; sheep and goats and brawns They slew, all fatted, and a pastur'd ox, Hast'ning the banquet; nor with less dispatch Ulysses and Eumæus now prepared To seek the town, when thus the swain began. 220 My guest! since thy fixt purpose is to seek This day the city as my master bade, Though I, in truth, much rather wish thee here A keeper of our herds, yet, through respect And rev'rence of his orders, whose reproof I dread, for masters seldom gently chide, I would be gone. Arise, let us depart, For day already is far-spent, and soon The air of even-tide will chill thee more. To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. 230 It is enough. I understand. Thou speak'st To one intelligent. Let us depart, And lead, thyself, the way; but give me, first, (If thou have one already hewn) a staff To lean on, for ye have described the road Rugged, and ofttimes dang'rous to the foot. So saying, his tatter'd wallet o'er his back He cast, suspended by a leathern twist, Eumæus gratified him with a staff, And forth they went, leaving the cottage kept 240 By dogs and swains. He city-ward his King Led on, in form a squalid beggar old, Halting, and in unseemly garb attired. But when, slow-travelling the craggy way, They now approach'd the town, and had attain'd The marble fountain deep, which with its streams Pellucid all the citizens supplied, (Ithacus had that fountain framed of old With Neritus and Polyctor, over which A grove of water-nourish'd alders hung 250 Circular on all sides, while cold the rill Ran from the rock, on whose tall summit stood The altar of the nymphs, by all who pass'd With sacrifice frequented, still, and pray'r) Melantheus, son of Dolius, at that fount Met them; the chosen goats of ev'ry flock, With two assistants, from the field he drove, The suitors' supper. He, seeing them both, In surly accent boorish, such as fired Ulysses with resentment, thus began. 260 Ay--this is well--The villain leads the vile-- Thus evermore the Gods join like to like. Thou clumsy swine-herd, whither would'st conduct This morsel-hunting mendicant obscene, Defiler base of banquets? many a post Shall he rub smooth that props him while he begs Lean alms, sole object of his low pursuit, Who ne'er to sword or tripod yet aspired. Would'st thou afford him to me for a guard Or sweeper of my stalls, or to supply 270 My kids with leaves, he should on bulkier thewes Supported stand, though nourish'd but with whey. But no such useful arts hath he acquired, Nor likes he work, but rather much to extort From others food for his unsated maw. But mark my prophecy, for it is true, At famed Ulysses' house should he arrive, His sides shall shatter many a footstool hurl'd Against them by the offended princes there. He spake, and drawing nigh, with his rais'd foot, 280 Insolent as he was and brutish, smote Ulysses' haunch, yet shook not from his path The firm-set Chief, who, doubtful, mused awhile Whether to rush on him, and with his staff To slay him, or uplifting him on high, Downward to dash him headlong; but his wrath Restraining, calm he suffer'd the affront. Him then Eumæus with indignant look Rebuking, rais'd his hands, and fervent pray'd. Nymphs of the fountains, progeny of Jove! 290 If e'er Ulysses on your altar burn'd The thighs of fatted lambs or kidlings, grant This my request. O let the Hero soon, Conducted by some Deity, return! So shall he quell that arrogance which safe Thou now indulgest, roaming day by day The city, while bad shepherds mar the flocks. To whom the goat-herd answer thus return'd Melantheus. Marvellous! how rare a speech The subtle cur hath framed! whom I will send 300 Far hence at a convenient time on board My bark, and sell him at no little gain. I would, that he who bears the silver bow As sure might pierce Telemachus this day In his own house, or that the suitors might, As that same wand'rer shall return no more! He said, and them left pacing slow along, But soon, himself, at his Lord's house arrived; There ent'ring bold, he with the suitors sat Opposite to Eurymachus, for him 310 He valued most. The sewers his portion placed Of meat before him, and the maiden, chief Directress of the household gave him bread. And now, Ulysses, with the swain his friend Approach'd, when, hearing the harmonious lyre, Both stood, for Phemius had begun his song. He grasp'd the swine-herd's hand, and thus he said. This house, Eumæus! of Ulysses seems Passing magnificent, and to be known With ease for his among a thousand more. 320 One pile supports another, and a wall Crested with battlements surrounds the court; Firm, too, the folding doors all force of man Defy; but num'rous guests, as I perceive, Now feast within; witness the sav'ry steam Fast-fuming upward, and the sounding harp, Divine associate of the festive board. To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. Thou hast well-guess'd; no wonder, thou art quick On ev'ry theme; but let us well forecast 330 This business. Wilt thou, ent'ring first, thyself, The splendid mansion, with the suitors mix, Me leaving here? or shall I lead the way While thou remain'st behind? yet linger not, Lest, seeing thee without, some servant strike Or drive thee hence. Consider which were best. Him answer'd, then, the patient Hero bold. It is enough. I understand. Thou speak'st To one intelligent. Lead thou the way Me leaving here, for neither stripes nor blows 340 To me are strange. Much exercised with pain In fight and on the Deep, I have long since Learn'd patience. Follow, next, what follow may! But, to suppress the appetite, I deem Impossible; the stomach is a source Of ills to man, an avaricious gulph Destructive, which to satiate, ships are rigg'd, Seas travers'd, and fierce battles waged remote. Thus they discoursing stood; Argus the while, Ulysses' dog, uplifted where he lay 350 His head and ears erect. Ulysses him Had bred long since, himself, but rarely used, Departing, first, to Ilium. Him the youths In other days led frequent to the chace Of wild goat, hart and hare; but now he lodg'd A poor old cast-off, of his Lord forlorn, Where mules and oxen had before the gate Much ordure left, with which Ulysses' hinds Should, in due time, manure his spacious fields. There lay, with dog-devouring vermin foul 360 All over, Argus; soon as he perceived Long-lost Ulysses nigh, down fell his ears Clapp'd close, and with his tail glad sign he gave Of gratulation, impotent to rise And to approach his master as of old. Ulysses, noting him, wiped off a tear Unmark'd, and of Eumæus quick enquired. I can but wonder seeing such a dog Thus lodg'd, Eumæus! beautiful in form He is, past doubt, but whether he hath been 370 As fleet as fair I know not; rather such Perchance as masters sometimes keep to grace Their tables, nourish'd more for shew than use. To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. He is the dog of one dead far remote. But had he now such feat-performing strength As when Ulysses left him, going hence To Ilium, in one moment thou shouldst mark, Astonish'd, his agility and force. He never in the sylvan deep recess 380 The wild beast saw that 'scaped him, and he track'd Their steps infallible; but he hath now No comfort, for (the master dead afar) The heedless servants care not for his dog. Domestics, missing once their Lord's controul, Grow wilful, and refuse their proper tasks; For whom Jove dooms to servitude, he takes At once the half of that man's worth away. He said, and, ent'ring at the portal, join'd The suitors. Then his destiny released 390 Old Argus, soon as he had lived to see Ulysses in the twentieth year restored. Godlike Telemachus, long ere the rest, Marking the swine-herd's entrance, with a nod Summon'd him to approach. Eumæus cast His eye around, and seeing vacant there The seat which the dispenser of the feast Was wont to occupy while he supplied The num'rous guests, planted it right before Telemachus, and at his table sat, 400 On which the herald placed for him his share Of meat, and from the baskets gave him bread. Soon after _him_, Ulysses enter'd slow The palace, like a squalid beggar old, Staff-propp'd, and in loose tatters foul attired. Within the portal on the ashen sill He sat, and, seeming languid, lean'd against A cypress pillar by the builder's art Polish'd long since, and planted at the door. Then took Telemachus a loaf entire 410 Forth from the elegant basket, and of flesh A portion large as his two hands contained, And, beck'ning close the swine-herd, charged him thus. These to the stranger; whom advise to ask Some dole from ev'ry suitor; bashful fear Ill suits the mendicant by want oppress'd. He spake; Eumæus went, and where he sat Arriving, in wing'd accents thus began. Telemachus, oh stranger, sends thee these, And counsels thee to importune for more 420 The suitors, one by one; for bashful fear Ill suits the mendicant by want oppress'd. To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. Jove, King of all, grant ev'ry good on earth To kind Telemachus, and the complete Accomplishment of all that he desires! He said, and with both hands outspread, the mess Receiving as he sat, on his worn bag Disposed it at his feet. Long as the bard Chaunted, he ate, and when he ceas'd to eat, 430 Then also ceas'd the bard divine to sing. And now ensued loud clamour in the hall And tumult, when Minerva, drawing nigh To Laertiades, impell'd the Chief Crusts to collect, or any pittance small At ev'ry suitor's hand, for trial's sake Of just and unjust; yet deliv'rance none From evil she design'd for any there. From left to right[75] his progress he began Petitioning, with outstretch'd hands, the throng, 440 As one familiar with the beggar's art. They, pitying, gave to him, but view'd him still With wonder, and enquiries mutual made Who, and whence was he? Then the goat-herd rose Melanthius, and th' assembly thus address'd. Hear me, ye suitors of th' illustrious Queen! This guest, of whom ye ask, I have beheld Elsewhere; the swine-herd brought him; but himself I know not, neither who nor whence he is. So he; then thus Antinoüs stern rebuked 450 The swine-herd. Ah, notorious as thou art, Why hast thou shewn this vagabond the way Into the city? are we not enough Infested with these troublers of our feasts? Deem'st it a trifle that such numbers eat At thy Lord's cost, and hast thou, therefore, led This fellow hither, found we know not where? To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. Antinoüs! though of high degree, thou speak'st Not wisely. What man to another's house 460 Repairs to invite him to a feast, unless He be of those who by profession serve The public, prophet, healer of disease, Ingenious artist, or some bard divine Whose music may exhilarate the guests? These, and such only, are in ev'ry land Call'd to the banquet; none invites the poor, Who much consume, and no requital yield. But thou of all the suitors roughly treat'st Ulysses' servants most, and chiefly me; 470 Yet thee I heed not, while the virtuous Queen Dwells in this palace, and her godlike son. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. Peace! answer not verbose a man like him. Antinoüs hath a tongue accustom'd much To tauntings, and promotes them in the rest. Then, turning to Antinoüs, quick he said-- Antinoüs! as a father for his son Takes thought, so thou for me, who bidd'st me chase The stranger harshly hence; but God forbid![76] 480 Impart to him. I grudge not, but myself Exhort thee to it; neither, in this cause, Fear thou the Queen, or in the least regard Whatever menial throughout all the house Of famed Ulysses. Ah! within thy breast Dwells no such thought; thou lov'st not to impart To others, but to gratify thyself. To whom Antinoüs answer thus return'd. High-soaring and intemp'rate in thy speech How hast thou said, Telemachus? Would all 490 As much bestow on him, he should not seek Admittance here again three months to come. So saying, he seized the stool which, banqueting, He press'd with his nice feet, and from beneath The table forth advanced it into view. The rest all gave to him, with bread and flesh Filling his wallet, and Ulysses, now, Returning to his threshold, there to taste The bounty of the Greeks, paused in his way Beside Antinoüs, whom he thus address'd. 500 Kind sir! vouchsafe to me! for thou appear'st Not least, but greatest of the Achaians here, And hast a kingly look. It might become Thee therefore above others to bestow, So should I praise thee wheresoe'er I roam. I also lived the happy owner once Of such a stately mansion, and have giv'n To num'rous wand'rers (whencesoe'er they came) All that they needed; I was also served By many, and enjoy'd all that denotes 510 The envied owner opulent and blest. But Jove (for so it pleas'd him) hath reduced My all to nothing, prompting me, in league With rovers of the Deep, to sail afar To Ægypt, for my sure destruction there. Within th' Ægyptian stream my barks well-oar'd I station'd, and, enjoining strict my friends To watch them close-attendant at their side, Commanded spies into the hill-tops; but they, Under the impulse of a spirit rash 520 And hot for quarrel, the well-cultur'd fields Pillaged of the Ægyptians, captive led Their wives and little-ones, and slew the men. Ere long, the loud alarm their city reach'd. Down came the citizens, by dawn of day, With horse and foot and with the gleam of arms Filling the plain. Then Jove with panic dread Struck all my people; none found courage more To stand, for mischiefs swarm'd on ev'ry side. There, num'rous by the glitt'ring spear we fell 530 Slaughter'd, while others they conducted thence Alive to servitude; but me they gave To Dmetor, King in Cyprus, Jasus' son; He entertained me liberally, and thence This land I reach'd, but poor and woe-begone. Then answer thus Antinoüs harsh return'd. What dæmon introduced this nuisance here, This troubler of our feast? stand yonder, keep Due distance from my table, or expect To see an Ægypt and a Cyprus worse 540 Than those, bold mendicant and void of shame! Thou hauntest each, and, inconsid'rate, each Gives to thee, because gifts at other's cost Are cheap, and, plentifully serv'd themselves, They squander, heedless, viands not their own. To whom Ulysses while he slow retired. Gods! how illib'ral with that specious form! Thou wouldst not grant the poor a grain of salt From thy own board, who at another's fed So nobly, canst thou not spare a crust to me. 550 He spake; then raged Antinoüs still the more, And in wing'd accents, louring, thus replied. Take such dismission now as thou deserv'st, Opprobrious! hast thou dared to scoff at me? So saying, he seized his stool, and on the joint Of his right shoulder smote him; firm as rock He stood, by no such force to be displaced, But silent shook his brows, and dreadful deeds Of vengeance ruminating, sought again His seat the threshold, where his bag full-charged 560 He grounded, and the suitors thus address'd. Hear now, ye suitors of the matchless Queen, My bosom's dictates. Trivial is the harm, Scarce felt, if, fighting for his own, his sheep Perchance, or beeves, a man receive a blow. But me Antinoüs struck for that I ask'd Food from him merely to appease the pangs Of hunger, source of num'rous ills to man. If then the poor man have a God t' avenge His wrongs, I pray to him that death may seize 570 Antinoüs, ere his nuptial hour arrive! To whom Antinoüs answer thus return'd, Son of Eupithes. Either seated there Or going hence, eat, stranger, and be still; Lest for thy insolence, by hand or foot We drag thee forth, and thou be flay'd alive. He ceased, whom all indignant heard, and thus Ev'n his own proud companions censured him. Antinoüs! thou didst not well to smite The wretched vagabond. O thou art doom'd 580 For ever, if there be a God in heav'n;[77] For, in similitude of strangers oft, The Gods, who can with ease all shapes assume, Repair to populous cities, where they mark The outrageous and the righteous deeds of men. So they, for whose reproof he little cared. But in his heart Telemachus that blow Resented, anguish-torn, yet not a tear He shed, but silent shook his brows, and mused Terrible things. Penelope, meantime, 590 Told of the wand'rer so abused beneath Her roof, among her maidens thus exclaim'd. So may Apollo, glorious archer, smite Thee also. Then Eurynome replied, Oh might our pray'rs prevail, none of them all Should see bright-charioted Aurora more. Her answer'd then Penelope discrete. Nurse! they are odious all, for that alike All teem with mischief; but Antinoüs' looks Remind me ever of the gloom of death. 600 A stranger hath arrived who, begging, roams The house, (for so his penury enjoins) The rest have giv'n him, and have fill'd his bag With viands, but Antinoüs hath bruised His shoulder with a foot-stool hurl'd at him. While thus the Queen conversing with her train In her own chamber sat, Ulysses made Plenteous repast. Then, calling to her side Eumæus, thus she signified her will. Eumæus, noble friend! bid now approach 610 Yon stranger. I would speak with him, and ask If he has seen Ulysses, or have heard Tidings, perchance, of the afflicted Chief, For much a wand'rer by his garb he seems. To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. Were those Achaians silent, thou shouldst hear, O Queen! a tale that would console thy heart. Three nights I housed him, and within my cot Three days detain'd him, (for his ship he left A fugitive, and came direct to me) 620 But half untold his hist'ry still remains. As when his eye one fixes on a bard From heav'n instructed in such themes as charm The ear of mortals, ever as he sings The people press, insatiable, to hear, So, in my cottage, seated at my side, That stranger with his tale enchanted me. Laertes, he affirms, hath been his guest Erewhile in Crete, where Minos' race resides, And thence he hath arrived, after great loss, 630 A suppliant to the very earth abased; He adds, that in Thesprotia's neighbour realm He of Ulysses heard, both that he lives, And that he comes laden with riches home. To whom Penelope, discrete, replied. Haste; call him. I would hear, myself, his tale. Meantime, let these, or in the palace gate Sport jocular, or here; their hearts are light, For their possessions are secure; _their_ wine None drinks, or eats _their_ viands, save their own, 640 While my abode, day after day, themselves Haunting, my beeves and sheep and fatted goats Slay for the banquet, and my casks exhaust Extravagant, whence endless waste ensues; For no such friend as was Ulysses once Have I to expel the mischief. But might he Revisit once his native shores again, Then, aided by his son, he should avenge, Incontinent, the wrongs which now I mourn. Then sneezed Telemachus with sudden force, 650 That all the palace rang; his mother laugh'd, And in wing'd accents thus the swain bespake. Haste--bid him hither--hear'st thou not the sneeze Propitious of my son? oh might it prove A presage of inevitable death To all these revellers! may none escape! Now mark me well. Should the event his tale Confirm, at my own hands he shall receive Mantle and tunic both for his reward. She spake; he went, and where Ulysses sat 660 Arriving, in wing'd accents thus began. Penelope, my venerable friend! Calls thee, the mother of Telemachus. Oppress'd by num'rous troubles, she desires To ask thee tidings of her absent Lord. And should the event verify thy report, Thy meed shall be (a boon which much thou need'st) Tunic and mantle; but she gives no more; Thy sustenance thou must, as now,