Him in Crete, 250 While yet he liv'd, all reverenc'd as a God, So rich, so prosp'rous, and so blest was he With sons of highest praise. But death, the doom Of all, him bore to Pluto's drear abode, And his illustrious sons among themselves Portion'd his goods by lot; to me, indeed, They gave a dwelling, and but little more, Yet, for my virtuous qualities, I won A wealthy bride, for I was neither vain Nor base, forlorn as thou perceiv'st me now. 260 But thou canst guess, I judge, viewing the straw What once was in the ear. Ah! I have borne Much tribulation; heap'd and heavy woes. Courage and phalanx-breaking might had I From Mars and Pallas; at what time I drew, (Planning some dread exploit) an ambush forth Of our most valiant Chiefs, no boding fears Of death seized _me_, but foremost far of all I sprang to fight, and pierced the flying foe. Such was I once in arms. But household toils 270 Sustain'd for children's sake, and carking cares T' enrich a family, were not for me. My pleasures were the gallant bark, the din Of battle, the smooth spear and glitt'ring shaft, Objects of dread to others, but which me The Gods disposed to love and to enjoy. Thus diff'rent minds are diff'rently amused; For ere Achaia's fleet had sailed to Troy, Nine times was I commander of an host Embark'd against a foreign foe, and found 280 In all those enterprizes great success. From the whole booty, first, what pleased me most Chusing, and sharing also much by lot I rapidly grew rich, and had thenceforth Among the Cretans rev'rence and respect. But when loud-thund'ring Jove that voyage dire Ordain'd, which loos'd the knees of many a Greek, Then, to Idomeneus and me they gave The charge of all their fleet, which how to avoid We found not, so importunate the cry 290 Of the whole host impell'd us to the task. There fought we nine long years, and in the tenth (Priam's proud city pillag'd) steer'd again Our galleys homeward, which the Gods dispersed. Then was it that deep-planning Jove devised For me much evil. One short month, no more, I gave to joys domestic, in my wife Happy, and in my babes, and in my wealth, When the desire seiz'd me with sev'ral ships Well-rigg'd, and furnish'd all with gallant crews, 300 To sail for Ægypt; nine I fitted forth, To which stout mariners assembled fast. Six days the chosen partners of my voyage Feasted, to whom I num'rous victims gave For sacrifice, and for their own regale. Embarking on the sev'nth from spacious Crete, Before a clear breeze prosp'rous from the North We glided easily along, as down A river's stream; nor one of all my ships Damage incurr'd, but healthy and at ease 310 We sat, while gales well-managed urged us on. The fifth day thence, smooth-flowing Nile we reach'd, And safe I moor'd in the Ægyptian stream. Then, charging all my mariners to keep Strict watch for preservation of the ships, I order'd spies into the hill-tops; but they Under the impulse of a spirit rash And hot for quarrel, the well-cultur'd fields Pillaged of the Ægyptians, captive led Their wives and little ones, and slew the men. 320 Soon was the city alarm'd, and at the cry Down came the citizens, by dawn of day, With horse and foot, and with the gleam of arms Filling the plain. Then Jove with panic dread Struck all my people; none found courage more To stand, for mischiefs swarm'd on ev'ry side. There, num'rous by the glittering spear we fell Slaughter'd, while others they conducted thence Alive to servitude. But Jove himself My bosom with this thought inspired, (I would 330 That, dying, I had first fulfill'd my fate In Ægypt, for new woes were yet to come!) Loosing my brazen casque, and slipping off My buckler, there I left them on the field, Then cast my spear away, and seeking, next, The chariot of the sov'reign, clasp'd his knees, And kiss'd them. He, by my submission moved, Deliver'd me, and to his chariot-seat Raising, convey'd me weeping to his home. With many an ashen spear his warriors sought 340 To slay me, (for they now grew fiery wroth) But he, through fear of hospitable Jove, Chief punisher of wrong, saved me alive. Sev'n years I there abode, and much amass'd Among the Ægyptians, gifted by them all; But, in the eighth revolving year, arrived A shrewd Phœnician, in all fraud adept, Hungry, and who had num'rous harm'd before, By whom I also was cajoled, and lured T' attend him to Phœnicia, where his house 350 And his possessions lay; there I abode A year complete his inmate; but (the days And months accomplish'd of the rolling year, And the new seasons ent'ring on their course) To Lybia then, on board his bark, by wiles He won me with him, partner of the freight Profess'd, but destin'd secretly to sale, That he might profit largely by my price. Not unsuspicious, yet constrain'd to go, With this man I embark'd. A cloudless gale 360 Propitious blowing from the North, our ship Ran right before it through the middle sea, In the offing over Crete; but adverse Jove Destruction plann'd for them and death the while. For, Crete now left afar, and other land Appearing none, but sky alone and sea, Right o'er the hollow bark Saturnian Jove A cloud cærulean hung, dark'ning the Deep. Then, thund'ring oft, he hurl'd into the bark His bolts; she smitten by the fires of Jove, 370 Quaked all her length; with sulphur fill'd she reek'd, And, o'er her sides precipitated, plunged Like gulls the crew, forbidden by that stroke Of wrath divine to hope their country more. But Jove himself, when I had cast away All hope of life, conducted to my arms The strong tall mast, that I might yet escape. Around that beam I clung, driving before The stormy blast. Nine days complete I drove, And, on the tenth dark night, the rolling flood 380 Immense convey'd me to Thesprotia's shore. There me the Hero Phidon, gen'rous King Of the Thesprotians, freely entertained; For his own son discov'ring me with toil Exhausted and with cold, raised me, and thence Led me humanely to his father's house, Who cherish'd me, and gave me fresh attire. There heard I of Ulysses, whom himself Had entertain'd, he said, on his return To his own land; he shew'd me also gold, 390 Brass, and bright steel elab'rate, whatsoe'er Ulysses had amass'd, a store to feed A less illustrious family than his To the tenth generation, so immense His treasures in the royal palace lay. Himself, he said, was to Dodona gone, There, from the tow'ring oaks of Jove to ask Counsel divine, if openly to land (After long absence) in his opulent realm Of Ithaca, be best, or in disguise. 400 To me the monarch swore, in his own hall Pouring libation, that the ship was launch'd, And the crew ready for his conduct home. But me he first dismiss'd, for, as it chanced, A ship lay there of the Thesprotians, bound To green Dulichium's isle. He bade the crew Bear me to King Acastus with all speed; But them far other thoughts pleased more, and thoughts Of harm to me, that I might yet be plunged In deeper gulphs of woe than I had known. 410 For, when the billow-cleaving bark had left The land remote, framing, combined, a plot Against my liberty, they stripp'd my vest And mantle, and this tatter'd raiment foul Gave me instead, which thy own eyes behold. At even-tide reaching the cultur'd coast Of Ithaca, they left me bound on board With tackle of the bark, and quitting ship Themselves, made hasty supper on the shore. But me, meantime, the Gods easily loos'd 420 By their own pow'r, when, with wrapper vile Around my brows, sliding into the sea At the ship's stern, I lay'd me on the flood. With both hands oaring thence my course, I swam Till past all ken of theirs; then landing where Thick covert of luxuriant trees I mark'd, Close couchant down I lay; they mutt'ring loud, Paced to and fro, but deeming farther search Unprofitable, soon embark'd again. Thus baffling all their search with ease, the Gods 430 Conceal'd and led me thence to the abode Of a wise man, dooming me still to live. To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply, Alas! my most compassionable guest! Thou hast much moved me by this tale minute Of thy sad wand'rings and thy num'rous woes. But, speaking of Ulysses, thou hast pass'd All credence; I at least can give thee none. Why, noble as thou art, should'st thou invent Palpable falsehoods? as for the return 440 Of my regretted Lord, myself I know That had he not been hated by the Gods Unanimous, he had in battle died At Troy, or (that long doubtful war, at last, Concluded,) in his people's arms at home. Then universal Greece had raised his tomb, And he had even for his son atchiev'd Immortal glory; but alas! by beaks Of harpies torn, unseemly sight, he lies. Here is my home the while; I never seek 450 The city, unless summon'd by discrete Penelope to listen to the news Brought by some stranger, whencesoe'er arrived. Then, all, alike inquisitive, attend, Both who regret the absence of our King, And who rejoice gratuitous to gorge His property; but as for me, no joy Find I in list'ning after such reports, Since an Ætolian cozen'd me, who found (After long wand'ring over various lands 460 A fugitive for blood) my lone retreat. Him warm I welcom'd, and with open arms Receiv'd, who bold affirm'd that he had seen My master with Idomeneus at Crete His ships refitting shatter'd by a storm, And that in summer with his godlike band He would return, bringing great riches home, Or else in autumn. And thou ancient guest Forlorn! since thee the Gods have hither led, Seek not to gratify me with untruths 470 And to deceive me, since for no such cause I shall respect or love thee, but alone By pity influenced, and the fear of Jove. To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. Thou hast, in truth, a most incredulous mind, Whom even with an oath I have not moved, Or aught persuaded. Come then--let us make In terms express a cov'nant, and the Gods Who hold Olympus, witness to us both! If thy own Lord at this thy house arrive, 480 Thou shalt dismiss me decently attired In vest and mantle, that I may repair Hence to Dulichium, whither I would go. But, if thy Lord come not, then, gath'ring all Thy servants, headlong hurl me from a rock, That other mendicants may fear to lie. To whom the generous swine-herd in return. Yes, stranger! doubtless I should high renown Obtain for virtue among men, both now And in all future times, if, having first 490 Invited thee, and at my board regaled, I, next, should slay thee; then my pray'rs would mount, Past question, swiftly to Saturnian Jove. But the hour calls to supper, and, ere long, The partners of my toils will come prepared To spread the board with no unsav'ry cheer. Thus they conferr'd. And now the swains arrived, Driving their charge, which fast they soon enclosed Within their customary penns, and loud The hubbub was of swine prison'd within. 500 Then call'd the master to his rustic train. Bring ye the best, that we may set him forth Before my friend from foreign climes arrived, With whom ourselves will also feast, who find The bright-tusk'd multitude a painful charge, While others, at no cost of theirs, consume Day after day, the profit of our toils. So saying, his wood for fuel he prepared, And dragging thither a well-fatted brawn Of the fifth year his servants held him fast 510 At the hearth-side. Nor failed the master swain T' adore the Gods, (for wise and good was he) But consecration of the victim, first, Himself performing, cast into the fire The forehead bristles of the tusky boar, Then pray'd to all above, that, safe, at length, Ulysses might regain his native home. Then lifting an huge shive that lay beside The fire, he smote the boar, and dead he fell, Next, piercing him, and scorching close his hair, 520 They carv'd him quickly, and Eumæus spread Thin slices crude taken from ev'ry limb O'er all his fat, then other slices cast, Sprinkling them first with meal, into the fire. The rest they slash'd and scored, and roasted well, And placed it, heap'd together, on the board. Then rose the good Eumæus to his task Of distribution, for he understood The hospitable entertainer's part. Sev'n-fold partition of the banquet made, 530 He gave, with previous pray'r, to Maia's son[63] And to the nymphs one portion of the whole, Then served his present guests, honouring first Ulysses with the boar's perpetual chine; By that distinction just his master's heart He gratified, and thus the Hero spake. Eumæus! be thou as belov'd of Jove As thou art dear to me, whom, though attired So coarsely, thou hast served with such respect! To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. 540 Eat, noble stranger! and refreshment take Such as thou may'st; God[64] gives, and God denies At his own will, for He is Lord of all. He said, and to the everlasting Gods The firstlings sacrificed of all, then made Libation, and the cup placed in the hands Of city-spoiler Laertiades Sitting beside his own allotted share. Meantime, Mesaulius bread dispensed to all, Whom, in the absence of his Lord, himself 550 Eumæus had from Taphian traders bought With his own proper goods, at no expence Either to old Laertes or the Queen. And now, all stretch'd their hands toward the feast Reeking before them, and when hunger none Felt more or thirst, Mesaulius clear'd the board. Then, fed to full satiety, in haste Each sought his couch. Black came a moonless night, And Jove all night descended fast in show'rs, With howlings of the ever wat'ry West. 560 Ulysses, at that sound, for trial sake Of his good host, if putting off his cloak He would accommodate him, or require That service for him at some other hand, Addressing thus the family, began. Hear now, Eumæus, and ye other swains His fellow-lab'rers! I shall somewhat boast, By wine befool'd, which forces ev'n the wise To carol loud, to titter and to dance, And words to utter, oft, better suppress'd. 570 But since I have begun, I shall proceed, Prating my fill. Ah might those days return With all the youth and strength that I enjoy'd, When in close ambush, once, at Troy we lay! Ulysses, Menelaus, and myself Their chosen coadjutor, led the band. Approaching to the city's lofty wall Through the thick bushes and the reeds that gird The bulwarks, down we lay flat in the marsh, Under our arms, then Boreas blowing loud, 580 A rueful night came on, frosty and charged With snow that blanch'd us thick as morning rime, And ev'ry shield with ice was crystall'd o'er. The rest with cloaks and vests well cover'd, slept Beneath their bucklers; I alone my cloak, Improvident, had left behind, no thought Conceiving of a season so severe; Shield and belt, therefore, and nought else had I. The night, at last, nigh spent, and all the stars Declining in their course, with elbow thrust 590 Against Ulysses' side I roused the Chief, And thus address'd him ever prompt to hear. Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd! I freeze to death. Help me, or I am lost. No cloak have I; some evil dæmon, sure, Beguil'd me of all prudence, that I came Thus sparely clad; I shall, I must expire. So I; he, ready as he was in arms And counsel both, the remedy at once Devised, and thus, low-whisp'ring, answer'd me. 600 Hush! lest perchance some other hear--He said, And leaning on his elbow, spake aloud. My friends! all hear--a monitory dream Hath reach'd me, for we lie far from the ships. Haste, therefore, one of you, with my request To Agamemnon, Atreus' son, our Chief, That he would reinforce us from the camp. He spake, and at the word, Andræmon's son Thoas arose, who, casting off his cloak, Ran thence toward the ships, and folded warm 610 Within it, there lay I till dawn appear'd. Oh for the vigour of such youth again! Then, some good peasant here, either for love Or for respect, would cloak a man like me, Whom, now, thus sordid in attire ye scorn. To whom, Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. My ancient guest! I cannot but approve Thy narrative, nor hast thou utter'd aught Unseemly, or that needs excuse. No want Of raiment, therefore, or of aught beside 620 Needful to solace penury like thine, Shall harm thee here; yet, at the peep of dawn Gird thy own tatters to thy loins again; For _we_ have no great store of cloaks to boast, Or change of vests, but singly one for each. But when Ulysses' son shall once arrive, He will himself with vest and mantle both Cloath thee, and send thee whither most thou would'st. So saying, he rose, and nearer made his couch To the hearth-side, spreading it thick with skins 630 Of sheep and goats; then lay the Hero down, O'er whom a shaggy mantle large he threw, Which oft-times served him with a change, when rough The winter's blast and terrible arose. So was Ulysses bedded, and the youths Slept all beside him; but the master-swain Chose not his place of rest so far remote From his rude charge, but to the outer court With his nocturnal furniture, repair'd, Gladd'ning Ulysses' heart that one so true 640 In his own absence kept his rural stores. Athwart his sturdy shoulders, first, he flung His faulchion keen, then wrapp'd him in a cloak Thick-woven, winter-proof; he lifted, next, The skin of a well-thriven goat, in bulk Surpassing others, and his javelin took Sharp-pointed, with which dogs he drove and men. Thus arm'd, he sought his wonted couch beneath A hollow rock where the herd slept, secure From the sharp current of the Northern blast. 650 FOOTNOTES: [61] Δῖος ὑφορβος.--The swineherd's was therefore in those days, and in that country, an occupation honourable as well as useful. Barnes deems the epithet δῖος significant of his noble birth. Vide Clarke in loco. [62] It may be proper to suggest that Ulysses was lord of part of the continent opposite to Ithaca--viz.--of the peninsula Nericus or Leuca, which afterward became an island, and is now called Santa Maura. F. [63] Mercury. [64] Θεος--without a relative, and consequently signifying GOD in the abstract, is not unfrequently found in Homer, though fearing to give offence to serious minds unacquainted with the original, I have not always given it that force in the translation. But here, the sentiment is such as fixes the sense intended by the author with a precision that leaves no option. It is observable too, that δυναται γαρ απαντα--is an ascription of power such as the poet never makes to his Jupiter. BOOK XV ARGUMENT Telemachus, admonished by Minerva, takes leave of Menelaus, but ere he sails, is accosted by Theoclymenos, a prophet of Argos, whom at his earnest request he takes on board. In the meantime Eumæus relates to Ulysses the means by which he came to Ithaca. Telemachus arriving there, gives orders for the return of his bark to the city, and repairs himself to Eumæus. Meantime to Lacedæmon's spacious vale Minerva went, that she might summon thence Ulysses' glorious son to his own home. Arrived, she found Telemachus reposed And Nestor's son beneath the vestibule Of Menelaus, mighty Chief; she saw Pisistratus in bands of gentle sleep Fast-bound, but not Telemachus; his mind No rest enjoy'd, by filial cares disturb'd Amid the silent night, when, drawing near 10 To his couch side, the Goddess thus began. Thou canst no longer prudently remain A wand'rer here, Telemachus! thy home Abandon'd, and those haughty suitors left Within thy walls; fear lest, partition made Of thy possessions, they devour the whole, And in the end thy voyage bootless prove. Delay not; from brave Menelaus ask Dismission hence, that thou may'st find at home Thy spotless mother, whom her brethren urge 20 And her own father even now to wed Eurymachus, in gifts and in amount Of proffer'd dow'r superior to them all. Some treasure, else, shall haply from thy house Be taken, such as thou wilt grudge to spare. For well thou know'st how woman is disposed; Her whole anxiety is to encrease His substance whom she weds; no care hath she Of her first children, or remembers more The buried husband of her virgin choice. 30 Returning then, to her of all thy train Whom thou shalt most approve, the charge commit Of thy concerns domestic, till the Gods Themselves shall guide thee to a noble wife. Hear also this, and mark it. In the frith Samos the rude, and Ithaca between, The chief of all her suitors thy return In vigilant ambush wait, with strong desire To slay thee, ere thou reach thy native shore, But shall not, as I judge, till the earth hide 40 Many a lewd reveller at thy expence. Yet, steer thy galley from those isles afar, And voyage make by night; some guardian God Shall save thee, and shall send thee prosp'rous gales. Then, soon as thou attain'st the nearest shore Of Ithaca, dispatching to the town Thy bark with all thy people, seek at once The swine-herd; for Eumæus is thy friend. There sleep, and send him forth into the town With tidings to Penelope, that safe 50 Thou art restored from Pylus home again. She said, and sought th' Olympian heights sublime. Then, with his heel shaking him, he awoke The son of Nestor, whom he thus address'd. Rise, Nestor's son, Pisistratus! lead forth The steeds, and yoke them. We must now depart. To whom the son of Nestor thus replied. Telemachus! what haste soe'er we feel, We can by no means prudently attempt To drive by night, and soon it will be dawn. 60 Stay, therefore, till the Hero, Atreus' son, Spear-practis'd Menelaus shall his gifts Place in the chariot, and with kind farewell Dismiss thee; for the guest in mem'ry holds Through life, the host who treats him as a friend. Scarce had he spoken, when the golden dawn Appearing, Menelaus, from the side Of beauteous Helen ris'n, their bed approach'd, Whose coming when Telemachus perceived, Cloathing himself hastily in his vest 70 Magnificent, and o'er his shoulders broad Casting his graceful mantle, at the door He met the Hero, whom he thus address'd. Atrides, Menelaus, Chief renown'd! Dismiss me hence to Ithaca again, My native isle, for I desire to go. Him answer'd Menelaus famed in arms. Telemachus! I will not long delay Thy wish'd return. I disapprove alike The host whose assiduity extreme 80 Distresses, and whose negligence offends; The middle course is best; alike we err, Him thrusting forth whose wish is to remain, And hind'ring the impatient to depart. This only is true kindness--To regale The present guest, and speed him when he would. Yet stay, till thou shalt see my splendid gifts Placed in thy chariot, and till I command My women from our present stores to spread The table with a plentiful repast. 90 For both the honour of the guest demands, And his convenience also, that he eat Sufficient, ent'ring on a length of road. But if through Hellas thou wilt take thy way And traverse Argos, I will, then, myself Attend thee; thou shalt journey with my steeds Beneath thy yoke, and I will be thy guide To many a city, whence we shall not go Ungratified, but shall in each receive Some gift at least, tripod, or charger bright, 100 Or golden chalice, or a pair of mules. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. Atrides, Menelaus, Chief renown'd! I would at once depart, (for guardian none Of my possessions have I left behind) Lest, while I seek my father, I be lost Myself, or lose what I should grudge to spare. Which when the valiant Menelaus heard, He bade his spouse and maidens spread the board At once with remnants of the last regale. 110 Then Eteoneus came, Boetheus' son Newly aris'n, for nigh at hand he dwelt, Whom Menelaus bade kindle the fire By which to dress their food, and he obey'd. He next, himself his fragrant chamber sought, Not sole, but by his spouse and by his son Attended, Megapenthes. There arrived Where all his treasures lay, Atrides, first, Took forth, himself, a goblet, then consign'd To his son's hand an argent beaker bright. 120 Meantime, beside her coffers Helen stood Where lay her variegated robes, fair works Of her own hand. Producing one, in size And in magnificence the chief, a star For splendour, and the lowest placed of all, Loveliest of her sex, she bore it thence. Then, all proceeding through the house, they sought Telemachus again, whom reaching, thus The Hero of the golden locks began. May Jove the Thunderer, dread Juno's mate, 130 Grant thee, Telemachus! such voyage home As thy own heart desires! accept from all My stores selected as the richest far And noblest gift for finish'd beauty--This. I give thee wrought elaborate a cup, Itself all silver, bound with lip of gold. It is the work of Vulcan, which to me The Hero Phædimus imparted, King Of the Sidonians, when, on my return, Beneath his roof I lodg'd. I make it thine. 140 So saying, the Hero, Atreus' son, the cup Placed in his hands, and Megapenthes set Before him, next, the argent beaker bright; But lovely Helen drawing nigh, the robe Presented to him, whom she thus address'd. I also give thee, oh my son, a gift, Which seeing, thou shalt think on her whose hands Wrought it; a present on thy nuptial day For thy fair spouse; meantime, repose it safe In thy own mother's keeping. Now, farewell! 150 Prosp'rous and happy be thy voyage home! She ceas'd, and gave it to him, who the gift Accepted glad, and in the chariot-chest Pisistratus the Hero all disposed, Admiring them the while. They, following, next, The Hero Menelaus to his hall Each on his couch or on his throne reposed. A maiden, then, with golden ewer charged And silver bowl, pour'd water on their hands, And spread the polish'd table, which with food 160 Various, selected from her present stores, The mistress of the household charge supplied. Boetheus' son stood carver, and to each His portion gave, while Megapenthes, son Of glorious Menelaus, serv'd the cup. Then, all with outstretch'd hands the feast assail'd, And when nor hunger more nor thirst of wine They felt, Telemachus and Nestor's son Yoked the swift steeds, and, taking each his seat In the resplendent chariot, drove at once 170 Right through the sounding portico abroad. But Menelaus, Hero amber-hair'd, A golden cup bearing with richest wine Replete in his right hand, follow'd them forth, That not without libation first perform'd They might depart; he stood before the steeds, And drinking first, thus, courteous, them bespake. Health to you both, young friends! and from my lips Like greeting bear to Nestor, royal Chief, For he was ever as a father kind 180 To me, while the Achaians warr'd at Troy. To whom Telemachus discrete replied. And doubtless, so we will; at our return We will report to him, illustrious Prince! Thy ev'ry word. And oh, I would to heav'n That reaching Ithaca, I might at home Ulysses hail as sure, as I shall hence Depart, with all benevolence by thee Treated, and rich in many a noble gift. While thus he spake, on his right hand appear'd 190 An eagle; in his talons pounced he bore A white-plumed goose domestic, newly ta'en From the house-court. Ran females all and males Clamorous after him; but he the steeds Approaching on the right, sprang into air. That sight rejoicing and with hearts reviv'd They view'd, and thus Pisistratus his speech Amid them all to Menelaus turn'd. Now, Menelaus, think, illustrious Chief! If us, this omen, or thyself regard. 200 While warlike Menelaus musing stood What answer fit to frame, Helen meantime, His spouse long-stoled preventing him, began. Hear me; for I will answer as the Gods Teach me, and as I think shall come to pass. As he, descending from his place of birth The mountains, caught our pamper'd goose away, So shall Ulysses, after many woes And wand'rings to his home restored, avenge His wrongs, or even now is at his home 210 For all those suitors sowing seeds of woe. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. Oh grant it Jove, Juno's high-thund'ring mate! So will I, there arrived, with vow and pray'r Thee worship, as thou wert, thyself, divine. He said, and lash'd the coursers; fiery they And fleet, sprang through the city to the plain. All day the yoke on either side they shook, Journeying swift; and now the setting sun To gloomy evening had resign'd the roads, 220 When they to Pheræ came, and in the house Of good Diocles slept, their lib'ral host, Whose sire Orsilochus from Alpheus sprang. But when Aurora, daughter of the Dawn, Look'd rosy from the East, yoking their steeds, They in the sumptuous chariot sat again. Forth through the vestibule they drove, and through The sounding portico, when Nestor's son Plied brisk the scourge, and willing flew the steeds. Thus whirl'd along, soon they approach'd the gates 230 Of Pylus, when Telemachus, his speech Turning to his companion, thus began. How, son of Nestor! shall I win from thee Not promise only, but performance kind Of my request? we are not bound alone To friendship by the friendship of our sires, But by equality of years, and this Our journey shall unite us still the more. Bear me not, I intreat thee, noble friend! Beyond the ship, but drop me at her side, 240 Lest ancient Nestor, though against my will, Detain me in his palace through desire To feast me, for I dread the least delay. He spake; then mused Pisistratus how best He might effect the wishes of his friend, And thus at length resolved; turning his steeds With sudden deviation to the shore He sought the bark, and placing in the stern Both gold and raiment, the illustrious gifts Of Menelaus, thus, in accents wing'd 250 With ardour, urged Telemachus away. Dispatch, embark, summon thy crew on board, Ere my arrival notice give of thine To the old King; for vehement I know His temper, neither will he let thee hence, But, hasting hither, will himself enforce Thy longer stay, that thou may'st not depart Ungifted; nought will fire his anger more. So saying, he to the Pylian city urged His steeds bright-maned, and at the palace-gate 260 Arrived of Nestor speedily; meantime Telemachus exhorted thus his crew. My gallant friends! set all your tackle, climb The sable bark, for I would now return. He spake; they heard him gladly, and at once All fill'd the benches. While his voyage he Thus expedited, and beside the stern To Pallas sacrifice perform'd and pray'd, A stranger, born remote, who had escaped From Argos, fugitive for blood, a seer 270 And of Melampus' progeny, approach'd. Melampus, in old time, in Pylus dwelt, Mother of flocks, alike for wealth renown'd And the magnificence of his abode. He, flying from the far-famed Pylian King, The mighty Neleus[65], migrated at length Into another land, whose wealth, the while, Neleus by force possess'd a year complete. Meantime, Melampus in the house endured Of Phylacus imprisonment and woe, 280 And burn'd with wrath for Neleus' daughter sake By fell Erynnis kindled in his heart. But, 'scaping death, he drove the lowing beeves From Phylace to Pylus, well avenged His num'rous injuries at Neleus' hands Sustain'd, and gave into his brother's arms King Neleus' daughter fair, the promis'd bride. To Argos steed-renown'd he journey'd next, There destin'd to inhabit and to rule Multitudes of Achaians. In that land 290 He married, built a palace, and became Father of two brave sons, Antiphates And Mantius; to Antiphates was born The brave Oïcleus; from Oïcleus sprang Amphiaraüs, demagogue renown'd, Whom with all tenderness, and as a friend Alike the Thund'rer and Apollo prized; Yet reach'd he not the bounds of hoary age. But by his mercenary consort's arts[66] Persuaded, met his destiny at Thebes. 300 He 'gat Alcmæon and Amphilocus. Mantius was also father of two sons, Clytus and Polyphides. Clytus pass'd From earth to heav'n, and dwells among the Gods, Stol'n by Aurora for his beauty's sake. But (brave Amphiaraüs once deceased) Phœbus exalted Polyphides far Above all others in the prophet's part. He, anger'd by his father, roam'd away To Hyperesia, where he dwelt renown'd 310 Throughout all lands the oracle of all. His son, named Theoclymenus, was he Who now approach'd; he found Telemachus Libation off'ring in his bark, and pray'r, And in wing'd accents ardent him address'd. Ah, friend! since sacrificing in this place I find thee, by these sacred rites and those Whom thou ador'st, and by thy own dear life, And by the lives of these thy mariners I beg true answer; hide not what I ask. 320 Who art thou? whence? where born? and sprung from whom? To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. I will inform thee, stranger! and will solve Thy questions with much truth. I am by birth Ithacan, and Ulysses was my sire. But he hath perish'd by a woeful death, And I, believing it, with these have plow'd The ocean hither, int'rested to learn A father's fate long absent from his home. Then answer'd godlike Theoclymenus. 330 I also am a wand'rer, having slain A man of my own tribe; brethren and friends Num'rous had he in Argos steed-renown'd, And pow'rful are the Achaians dwelling there. From them, through terrour of impending death, I fly, a banish'd man henceforth for ever. Ah save a suppliant fugitive! lest death O'ertake me, for I doubt not their pursuit. Whom thus Telemachus answer'd discrete. I shall not, be assured, since thou desir'st 340 To join me, chace thee from my bark away. Follow me, therefore, and with us partake, In Ithaca, what best the land affords. So saying, he at the stranger's hand received His spear, which on the deck he lay'd, then climb'd Himself the bark, and, seated in the stern, At his own side placed Theoclymenus. They cast the hawsers loose; then with loud voice Telemachus exhorted all to hand The tackle, whom the sailors prompt obey'd. 350 The tall mast heaving, in its socket deep They lodg'd it, and its cordage braced secure, Then, straining at the halyards, hoised the sail. Fair wind, and blowing fresh through æther pure Minerva sent them, that the bark might run Her nimblest course through all the briny way. Now sank the sun, and dusky ev'ning dimm'd The waves, when, driven by propitious Jove, His bark stood right for Pheræ; thence she stretch'd To sacred Elis where the Epeans rule, 360 And through the sharp Echinades he next Steer'd her, uncertain whether fate ordain'd His life or death, surprizal or escape. Meantime Ulysses and the swine-herd ate Their cottage-mess, and the assistant swains Theirs also; and when hunger now and thirst Had ceased in all, Ulysses thus