began, Proving the swine-herd, whether friendly still, And anxious for his good, he would intreat His stay, or thence hasten him to the town. 370 Eumæus, and all ye his servants, hear! It is my purpose, lest I wear thee out, Thee and thy friends, to seek at early dawn The city, there to beg--But give me first Needful instructions, and a trusty guide Who may conduct me thither; there my task Must be to roam the streets; some hand humane Perchance shall give me a small pittance there, A little bread, and a few drops to drink. Ulysses' palace I shall also seek, 380 And to discrete Penelope report My tidings; neither shall I fail to mix With those imperious suitors, who, themselves Full-fed, may spare perhaps some boon to me. Me shall they find, in whatsoe'er they wish Their ready servitor, for (understand And mark me well) the herald of the skies, Hermes, from whom all actions of mankind Their grace receive and polish, is my friend, So that in menial offices I fear 390 No rival, whether I be called to heap The hearth with fuel, or dry wood to cleave, To roast, to carve, or to distribute wine, As oft the poor are wont who serve the great. To whom, Eumæus! at those words displeased, Thou didst reply. Gods! how could such a thought Possess thee, stranger? surely thy resolve Is altogether fixt to perish there, If thou indeed hast purposed with that throng To mix, whose riot and outrageous acts 400 Of violence echo through the vault of heav'n. None, such as thou, serve _them_; their servitors Are youths well-cloak'd, well-vested; sleek their heads, And smug their countenances; such alone Are their attendants, and the polish'd boards Groan overcharg'd with bread, with flesh, with wine. Rest here content; for neither me nor these Thou weariest aught, and when Ulysses' son Shall come, he will with vest and mantle fair Cloath thee, and send thee whither most thou would'st. 410 To whom Ulysses, toil-inured. I wish thee, O Eumæus! dear to Jove As thou art dear to me, for this reprieve Vouchsafed me kind, from wand'ring and from woe! No worse condition is of mortal man Than his who wanders; for the poor man, driv'n By woe and by misfortune homeless forth, A thousand mis'ries, day by day, endures. Since thou detain'st me, then, and bidd'st me wait His coming, tell me if the father still 420 Of famed Ulysses live, whom, going hence, He left so nearly on the verge of life? And lives his mother? or have both deceased Already, and descended to the shades? To whom the master swine-herd thus replied. I will inform thee, and with strictest truth, Of all that thou hast ask'd. Laertes lives, But supplication off'ring to the Gods Ceaseless, to free him from a weary life, So deeply his long-absent son he mourns, 430 And the dear consort of his early youth, Whose death is his chief sorrow, and hath brought Old age on him, or ere its date arrived. She died of sorrow for her glorious son, And died deplorably;[67] may never friend Of mine, or benefactor die as she! While yet she liv'd, dejected as she was, I found it yet some solace to converse With her, who rear'd me in my childish days, Together with her lovely youngest-born 440 The Princess Ctimena; for side by side We grew, and I, scarce honour'd less than she. But soon as our delightful prime we both Attain'd, to Samos her they sent, a bride, And were requited with rich dow'r; but me Cloath'd handsomely with tunic and with vest, And with fair sandals furnish'd, to the field She order'd forth, yet loved me still the more. I miss her kindness now; but gracious heav'n Prospers the work on which I here attend; 450 Hence have I food, and hence I drink, and hence Refresh, sometimes, a worthy guest like thee. But kindness none experience I, or can, From fair Penelope (my mistress now) In word or action, so is the house curs'd With that lewd throng. Glad would the servants be Might they approach their mistress, and receive Advice from her; glad too to eat and drink, And somewhat bear each to his rural home, For perquisites are ev'ry servant's joy. 460 Then answer thus, Ulysses wise return'd. Alas! good swain, Eumæus, how remote From friends and country wast thou forced to roam Ev'n in thy infancy! But tell me true. The city where thy parents dwelt, did foes Pillage it? or did else some hostile band Surprizing thee alone, on herd or flock Attendant, bear thee with them o'er the Deep, And sell thee at this Hero's house, who pay'd Doubtless for _thee_ no sordid price or small? 470 To whom the master swine-herd in reply. Stranger! since thou art curious to be told My story, silent listen, and thy wine At leisure quaff. The nights are longest now, And such as time for sleep afford, and time For pleasant conf'rence; neither were it good That thou should'st to thy couch before thy hour, Since even sleep is hurtful, in excess. Whoever here is weary, and desires Early repose, let him depart to rest, 480 And, at the peep of day, when he hath fed Sufficiently, drive forth my master's herd; But we with wine and a well-furnish'd board Supplied, will solace mutually derive From recollection of our sufferings past; For who hath much endured, and wander'd far, Finds the recital ev'n of sorrow sweet. Now hear thy question satisfied; attend! There is an island (thou hast heard, perchance, Of such an isle) named Syria;[68] it is placed 490 Above Ortigia, and a dial owns[69] True to the tropic changes of the year. No great extent she boasts, yet is she rich In cattle and in flocks, in wheat and wine. No famine knows that people, or disease Noisome, of all that elsewhere seize the race Of miserable man; but when old age Steals on the citizens, Apollo, arm'd With silver bow and bright Diana come, Whose gentle shafts dismiss them soon to rest. 500 Two cities share between them all the isle, And both were subject to my father's sway Ctesius Ormenides, a godlike Chief. It chanced that from Phœnicia, famed for skill In arts marine, a vessel thither came By sharpers mann'd, and laden deep with toys. Now, in my father's family abode A fair Phœnician, tall, full-sized, and skill'd In works of elegance, whom they beguiled. While she wash'd linen on the beach, beside 510 The ship, a certain mariner of those Seduced her; for all women, ev'n the wise And sober, feeble prove by love assail'd. Who was she, he enquired, and whence? nor she Scrupled to tell at once her father's home. I am of Sidon,[70] famous for her works In brass and steel; daughter of Arybas, Who rolls in affluence; Taphian pirates thence Stole me returning from the field, from whom This Chief procured me at no little cost. 520 Then answer thus her paramour return'd. Wilt thou not hence to Sidon in our ship, That thou may'st once more visit the abode Of thy own wealthy parents, and themselves? For still they live, and still are wealthy deem'd. To whom the woman. Even that might be, Would ye, ye seamen, by a solemn oath Assure me of a safe conveyance home. Then sware the mariners as she required, And, when their oath was ended, thus again 530 The woman of Phœnicia them bespake. Now, silence! no man, henceforth, of you all Accost me, though he meet me on the road, Or at yon fountain; lest some tattler run With tidings home to my old master's ear, Who, with suspicion touch'd, may _me_ confine In cruel bonds, and death contrive for _you_. But be ye close; purchase your stores in haste; And when your vessel shall be freighted full, Quick send me notice, for I mean to bring 540 What gold soever opportune I find, And will my passage cheerfully defray With still another moveable. I nurse The good man's son, an urchin shrewd, of age To scamper at my side; him will I bring, Whom at some foreign market ye shall prove Saleable at what price soe'er ye will. So saying, she to my father's house return'd. They, there abiding the whole year, their ship With purchased goods freighted of ev'ry kind, 550 And when, her lading now complete, she lay For sea prepared, their messenger arrived To summon down the woman to the shore. A mariner of theirs, subtle and shrewd, Then, ent'ring at my father's gate, produced A splendid collar, gold with amber strung. My mother (then at home) with all her maids Handling and gazing on it with delight, Proposed to purchase it, and he the nod Significant, gave unobserv'd, the while, 560 To the Phœnician woman, and return'd. She, thus informed, leading me by the hand Went forth, and finding in the vestibule The cups and tables which my father's guests Had used, (but they were to the forum gone For converse with their friends assembled there) Convey'd three cups into her bosom-folds, And bore them off, whom I a thoughtless child Accompanied, at the decline of day, When dusky evening had embrown'd the shore. 570 We, stepping nimbly on, soon reach'd the port Renown'd, where that Phœnician vessel lay. They shipp'd us both, and all embarking cleav'd Their liquid road, by favourable gales, Jove's gift, impell'd. Six days we day and night Continual sailed, but when Saturnian Jove Now bade the sev'nth bright morn illume the skies, Then, shaft-arm'd Dian struck the woman dead. At once she pitch'd headlong into the bilge Like a sea-coot, whence heaving her again, 580 The seamen gave her to be fishes' food, And I survived to mourn her. But the winds And rolling billows them bore to the coast Of Ithaca, where with his proper goods Laertes bought me. By such means it chanced That e'er I saw the isle in which I dwell. To whom Ulysses, glorious Chief, replied. Eumæus! thou hast moved me much, thy woes Enumerating thus at large. But Jove Hath neighbour'd all thy evil with this good, 590 That after num'rous sorrows thou hast reach'd The house of a kind master, at whose hands Thy sustenance is sure, and here thou lead'st A tranquil life; but I have late arrived, City after city of the world explored. Thus mutual they conferr'd, nor leisure found Save for short sleep, by morning soon surprized. Meantime the comrades of Telemachus Approaching land, cast loose the sail, and lower'd Alert the mast, then oar'd the vessel in. 600 The anchors heav'd aground,[71] and hawsers tied Secure, themselves, forth-issuing on the shore, Breakfast prepared, and charged their cups with wine. When neither hunger now, nor thirst remained Unsatisfied, Telemachus began. Push ye the sable bark without delay Home to the city. I will to the field Among my shepherds, and, (my rural works Survey'd,) at eve will to the town return. To-morrow will I set before you wine 610 And plenteous viands, wages of your toil. To whom the godlike Theoclymenus. Whither must I, my son? who, of the Chiefs Of rugged Ithaca, shall harbour me? Shall I to thine and to thy mother's house? Then thus Telemachus, discrete, replied. I would invite thee to proceed at once To our abode, since nought should fail thee there Of kind reception, but it were a course Now not adviseable; for I must myself, 620 Be absent, neither would my mother's eyes Behold thee, so unfrequent she appears Before the suitors, shunning whom, she sits Weaving continual at the palace-top. But I will name to thee another Chief Whom thou may'st seek, Eurymachus, the son Renown'd of prudent Polybus, whom all The people here reverence as a God. Far noblest of them all is he, and seeks More ardent than his rivals far, to wed 630 My mother, and to fill my father's throne. But, He who dwells above, Jove only knows If some disastrous day be not ordain'd For them, or ere those nuptials shall arrive. While thus he spake, at his right hand appear'd, Messenger of Apollo, on full wing, A falcon; in his pounces clench'd he bore A dove, which rending, down he pour'd her plumes Between the galley and Telemachus. Then, calling him apart, the prophet lock'd 640 His hand in his, and thus explain'd the sign. Not undirected by the Gods his flight On our right hand, Telemachus! this hawk Hath wing'd propitious; soon as I perceived I knew him ominous--In all the isle No family of a more royal note Than yours is found, and yours shall still prevail. Whom thus Telemachus answer'd discrete. Grant heav'n, my guest! that this good word of thine Fail not, and soon thou shalt such bounty share 650 And friendship at my hands, that, at first sight, Whoe'er shall meet thee shall pronounce thee blest. Then, to Piræus thus, his friend approved. Piræus, son of Clytius! (for of all My followers to the shore of Pylus, none More prompt than thou hath my desires perform'd) Now also to thy own abode conduct This stranger, whom with hospitable care Cherish and honour till myself arrive. To whom Piræus answer'd, spear-renown'd. 660 Telemachus! however long thy stay, Punctual I will attend him, and no want Of hospitality shall he find with me. So saying, he climb'd the ship, then bade the crew Embarking also, cast the hawsers loose, And each, obedient, to his bench repair'd. Meantime Telemachus his sandals bound, And lifted from the deck his glitt'ring spear. Then, as Telemachus had bidden them, Son of divine Ulysses, casting loose 670 The hawsers, forth they push'd into the Deep And sought the city, while with nimble pace Proceeding thence, Telemachus attain'd The cottage soon where good Eumæus slept, The swine-herd, faithful to his num'rous charge. FOOTNOTES: [65] Iphyclus the son of Phylacus had seized and detained cattle belonging to Neleus; Neleus ordered his nephew Melampus to recover them, and as security for his obedience seized on a considerable part of his possessions. Melampus attempted the service, failed, and was cast into prison; but at length escaping, accomplished his errand, vanquished Neleus in battle, and carried off his daughter Pero, whom Neleus had promised to the brother of Melampus, but had afterward refused her. [66] His wife Eryphyle, bribed by Polynices, persuaded him, though aware that death awaited him at that city, to go to Thebes, where he fell accordingly. [67] She is said to have hanged herself. [68] Not improbably the isthmus of Syracuse, an island, perhaps, or peninsula at that period, or at least imagined to be such by Homer. The birth of Diana gave fame to Ortygia. F. [69] Ὅθι τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο--The Translator has rendered the passage according to that interpretation of it to which several of the best expositors incline. Nothing can be so absurd as to suppose that Homer, so correct in his geography, could mean to place a Mediterranean island under the Tropic. [70] A principal city of Phœnicia. [71] The anchors were lodged on the shore, not plunged as ours. BOOK XVI ARGUMENT Telemachus dispatches Eumæus to the city to inform Penelope of his safe return from Pylus; during his absence, Ulysses makes himself known to his son. The suitors, having watched for Telemachus in vain, arrive again at Ithaca. It was the hour of dawn, when in the cot Kindling fresh fire, Ulysses and his friend Noble Eumæus dress'd their morning fare, And sent the herdsmen with the swine abroad. Seeing Telemachus, the watchful dogs Bark'd not, but fawn'd around him. At that sight, And at the sound of feet which now approach'd, Ulysses in wing'd accents thus remark'd. Eumæus! certain, either friend of thine Is nigh at hand, or one whom well thou know'st; 10 Thy dogs bark not, but fawn on his approach Obsequious, and the sound of feet I hear. Scarce had he ceased, when his own son himself Stood in the vestibule. Upsprang at once Eumæus wonder-struck, and from his hand Let fall the cups with which he was employ'd Mingling rich wine; to his young Lord he ran, His forehead kiss'd, kiss'd his bright-beaming eyes And both his hands, weeping profuse the while, As when a father folds in his embrace 20 Arrived from foreign lands in the tenth year His darling son, the offspring of his age, His only one, for whom he long hath mourn'd, So kiss'd the noble peasant o'er and o'er Godlike Telemachus, as from death escaped, And in wing'd accents plaintive thus began. Light of my eyes, thou com'st; it is thyself, Sweetest Telemachus! I had no hope To see thee more, once told that o'er the Deep Thou hadst departed for the Pylian coast. 30 Enter, my precious son; that I may sooth My soul with sight of thee from far arrived, For seldom thou thy feeders and thy farm Visitest, in the city custom'd much To make abode, that thou may'st witness there The manners of those hungry suitors proud. To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied. It will be so. There is great need, my friend! But here, for thy sake, have I now arrived, That I may look on thee, and from thy lips 40 Learn if my mother still reside at home, Or have become spouse of some other Chief, Leaving untenanted Ulysses' bed To be by noisome spiders webb'd around. To whom the master swine-herd in return. Not so, she, patient still as ever, dwells Beneath thy roof, but all her cheerless days Despairing wastes, and all her nights in tears. So saying, Eumæus at his hand received His brazen lance, and o'er the step of stone 50 Enter'd Telemachus, to whom his sire Relinquish'd, soon as he appear'd, his seat, But him Telemachus forbidding, said-- Guest, keep thy seat; our cottage will afford Some other, which Eumæus will provide. He ceased, and he, returning at the word, Reposed again; then good Eumæus spread Green twigs beneath, which, cover'd with a fleece, Supplied Ulysses' offspring with a seat. He, next, disposed his dishes on the board 60 With relicts charged of yesterday; with bread, Alert, he heap'd the baskets; with rich wine His ivy cup replenish'd; and a seat Took opposite to his illustrious Lord Ulysses. They toward the plenteous feast Stretch'd forth their hands, (and hunger now and thirst Both satisfied) Telemachus, his speech Addressing to their gen'rous host, began. Whence is this guest, my father? How convey'd Came he to Ithaca? What country boast 70 The mariners with whom he here arrived? For, that on foot he found us not, is sure. To whom Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. I will with truth answer thee, O my son! He boasts him sprung from ancestry renown'd In spacious Crete, and hath the cities seen Of various lands, by fate ordain'd to roam. Ev'n now, from a Thesprotian ship escaped, He reach'd my cottage--but he is thy own; I yield him to thee; treat him as thou wilt; 80 He is thy suppliant, and depends on thee. Then thus, Telemachus, discrete, replied. Thy words, Eumæus, pain my very soul. For what security can I afford To any in my house? myself am young, Nor yet of strength sufficient to repel An offer'd insult, and my mother's mind In doubtful balance hangs, if, still with me An inmate, she shall manage my concerns, Attentive only to her absent Lord 90 And her own good report, or shall espouse The noblest of her wooers, and the best Entitled by the splendour of his gifts. But I will give him, since I find him lodg'd A guest beneath thy roof, tunic and cloak, Sword double-edged, and sandals for his feet, With convoy to the country of his choice. Still, if it please thee, keep him here thy guest, And I will send him raiment, with supplies Of all sorts, lest he burthen thee and thine. 100 But where the suitors come, there shall not he With my consent, nor stand exposed to pride And petulance like theirs, lest by some sneer They wound him, and through him, wound also me; For little is it that the boldest can Against so many; numbers will prevail. Him answer'd then Ulysses toil-inured. Oh amiable and good! since even I Am free to answer thee, I will avow My heart within me torn by what I hear 110 Of those injurious suitors, who the house Infest of one noble as thou appear'st. But say--submittest thou to their controul Willingly, or because the people, sway'd By some response oracular, incline Against thee? Thou hast brothers, it may chance, Slow to assist thee--for a brother's aid Is of importance in whatever cause. For oh that I had youth as I have will, Or that renown'd Ulysses were my sire, 120 Or that himself might wander home again. Whereof hope yet remains! then might I lose My head, that moment, by an alien's hand, If I would fail, ent'ring Ulysses' gate, To be the bane and mischief of them all. But if alone to multitudes opposed I should perchance be foiled; nobler it were With my own people, under my own roof To perish, than to witness evermore Their unexampled deeds, guests shoved aside, 130 Maidens dragg'd forcibly from room to room, Casks emptied of their rich contents, and them Indulging glutt'nous appetite day by day Enormous, without measure, without end. To whom, Telemachus, discrete, replied. Stranger! thy questions shall from me receive True answer. Enmity or hatred none Subsists the people and myself between, Nor have I brothers to accuse, whose aid Is of importance in whatever cause, 140 For Jove hath from of old with single heirs Our house supplied; Arcesias none begat Except Laertes, and Laertes none Except Ulysses, and Ulysses me Left here his only one, and unenjoy'd. Thence comes it that our palace swarms with foes; For all the rulers of the neighbour isles, Samos, Dulichium, and the forest-crown'd Zacynthus, others also rulers here In craggy Ithaca, my mother seek 150 In marriage, and my household stores consume. But neither she those nuptial rites abhorr'd Refuses absolute, nor yet consents To end them; they my patrimony waste Meantime, and will destroy me also soon, As I expect, but heav'n disposes all. Eumæus! haste, my father! bear with speed News to Penelope that I am safe, And have arrived from Pylus; I will wait Till thou return; and well beware that none Hear thee beside, for I have many foes. To whom Eumæus, thou didst thus reply. It is enough. I understand. Thou speak'st To one intelligent. But say beside, Shall I not also, as I go, inform Distress'd Laertes? who while yet he mourn'd Ulysses only, could o'ersee the works, And dieted among his menials oft As hunger prompted him, but now, they say, Since thy departure to the Pylian shore, 170 He neither eats as he was wont, nor drinks, Nor oversees his hinds, but sighing sits And weeping, wasted even to the bone. Him then Telemachus answer'd discrete. Hard though it be, yet to his tears and sighs Him leave we now. We cannot what we would. For, were the ordering of all events Referr'd to our own choice, our first desire Should be to see my father's glad return. But once thy tidings told, wander not thou 180 In quest of Him, but hither speed again. Rather request my mother that she send Her household's governess without delay Privately to him; she shall best inform The ancient King that I have safe arrived. He said, and urged him forth, who binding on His sandals, to the city bent his way. Nor went Eumæus from his home unmark'd By Pallas, who in semblance of a fair Damsel, accomplish'd in domestic arts, 190 Approaching to the cottage' entrance, stood Opposite, by Ulysses plain discern'd, But to his son invisible; for the Gods Appear not manifest alike to all. The mastiffs saw her also, and with tone Querulous hid themselves, yet bark'd they not. She beckon'd him abroad. Ulysses saw The sign, and, issuing through the outer court, Approach'd her, whom the Goddess thus bespake. Laertes' progeny, for wiles renown'd! 200 Disclose thyself to thy own son, that, death Concerting and destruction to your foes, Ye may the royal city seek, nor long Shall ye my presence there desire in vain, For I am ardent to begin the fight. Minerva spake, and with her rod of gold Touch'd him; his mantle, first, and vest she made Pure as new-blanch'd; dilating, next, his form, She gave dimensions ampler to his limbs; Swarthy again his manly hue became, 210 Round his full face, and black his bushy chin. The change perform'd, Minerva disappear'd, And the illustrious Hero turn'd again Into the cottage; wonder at that sight Seiz'd on Telemachus; askance he look'd, Awe-struck, not unsuspicious of a God, And in wing'd accents eager thus began. Thou art no longer, whom I lately saw, Nor are thy cloaths, nor is thy port the same. Thou art a God, I know, and dwell'st in heav'n. 220 Oh, smile on us, that we may yield thee rites Acceptable, and present thee golden gifts Elaborate; ah spare us, Pow'r divine! To whom Ulysses, Hero toil-inured. I am no God. Why deem'st thou me divine? I am thy father, for whose sake thou lead'st A life of woe, by violence oppress'd. So saying, he kiss'd his son, while from his cheeks Tears trickled, tears till then, perforce restrained. Telemachus, (for he believed him not 230 His father yet) thus, wond'ring, spake again. My father, said'st thou? no. Thou art not He, But some Divinity beguiles my soul With mock'ries to afflict me still the more; For never mortal man could so have wrought By his own pow'r; some interposing God Alone could render thee both young and old, For old thou wast of late, and foully clad, But wear'st the semblance, now, of those in heav'n! To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. 240 Telemachus! it is not well, my son! That thou should'st greet thy father with a face Of wild astonishment, and stand aghast. Ulysses, save myself, none comes, be sure. Such as thou seest, after ten thousand woes Which I have borne, I visit once again My native country in the twentieth year. This wonder Athenæan Pallas wrought, She cloath'd me even with what form she would, For so she can. Now poor I seem and old, 250 Now young again, and clad in fresh attire. The Gods who dwell in yonder heav'n, with ease Dignify or debase a mortal man. So saying, he sat. Then threw Telemachus His arms around his father's neck, and wept. Desire intense of lamentation seized On both; soft murmurs utt'ring, each indulged His grief, more frequent wailing than the bird, (Eagle, or hook-nail'd vulture) from whose nest Some swain hath stol'n her yet unfeather'd young. 260 So from their eyelids they big drops distill'd Of tend'rest grief, nor had the setting sun Cessation of their weeping seen, had not Telemachus his father thus address'd. What ship convey'd thee to thy native shore, My father! and what country boast the crew? For, that on foot thou not arriv'dst, is sure. Then thus divine Ulysses toil-inured. My son! I will explicit all relate. Conducted by Phæacia's maritime sons 270 I came, a race accustom'd to convey Strangers who visit them across the Deep. Me, o'er the billows in a rapid bark Borne sleeping, on the shores of Ithaca They lay'd; rich gifts they gave me also, brass, Gold in full bags, and beautiful attire, Which, warn'd from heav'n, I have in caves conceal'd. By Pallas prompted, hither I repair'd That we might plan the slaughter of our foes, Whose numbers tell me now, that I may know 280 How pow'rful, certainly, and who they are, And consultation with my dauntless heart May hold, if we be able to contend Ourselves with all, or must have aid beside. Then, answer thus his son, discrete, return'd. My father! thy renown hath ever rung In thy son's ears, and by report thy force In arms, and wisdom I have oft been told. But terribly thou speak'st; amazement-fixt I hear; can two a multitude oppose, 290 And valiant warriors all? for neither ten Are they, nor twenty, but more num'rous far. Learn, now, their numbers. Fifty youths and two Came from Dulichium; they are chosen men, And six attendants follow in their train; From Samos twenty youths and four arrive, Zacynthus also of Achaia's sons Sends twenty more, and our own island adds, Herself, her twelve chief rulers; Medon, too, Is there the herald, and the bard divine, 300 With other two, intendants of the board. Should we within the palace, we alone, Assail them all, I fear lest thy revenge Unpleasant to thyself and deadly prove, Frustrating thy return. But recollect-- Think, if thou canst, on whose confed'rate arm Strenuous on our behalf we may rely. To him replied his patient father bold. I will inform thee. Mark. Weigh well my words. Will Pallas and the everlasting Sire 310 Alone suffice? or need we other aids? Then answer thus Telemachus return'd. Good friends indeed are they whom thou hast named, Though throned above the clouds; for their controul Is universal both in earth and heav'n. To whom Ulysses, toil-worn Chief renown'd. Not long will they from battle stand aloof, When once, within my palace, in the strength Of Mars, to sharp decision we shall urge The suitors. But thyself at early dawn 320 Our mansion seek, that thou may'st mingle there With that imperious throng; me in due time Eumæus to the city shall conduct, In form a miserable beggar old. But should they with dishonourable scorn Insult me, thou unmov'd my wrongs endure, And should they even drag me by the feet Abroad, or smite me with the spear, thy wrath Refraining, gently counsel them to cease From such extravagance; but well I know 330 That cease they will not, for their hour is come. And mark me well; treasure what now I say Deep in thy soul. When Pallas shall, herself, Suggest the measure, then, shaking my brows, I will admonish thee; thou, at the sign, Remove what arms soever in the hall Remain, and in the upper palace safe Dispose them; should the suitors, missing them, Perchance interrogate thee, then reply Gently--I have removed them from the smoke; 340 For they appear no more the arms which erst Ulysses, going hence to Ilium, left, But smirch'd and sullied by the breath of fire. This weightier reason (thou shalt also say) Jove taught me; lest, intoxicate with wine, Ye should assault each other in your brawls, Shaming both feast and courtship; for the view Itself of arms incites to their abuse. Yet leave two faulchions for ourselves alone, Two spears, two bucklers, which with sudden force 350 Impetuous we will seize, and Jove all-wise Their valour shall, and Pallas, steal away. This word store also in remembrance deep-- If mine in truth thou art, and of my blood, Then, of Ulysses to his home returned Let none hear news from thee, no, not my sire Laertes, nor Eumæus, nor of all The menials any, or ev'n Penelope, That thou and I, alone, may search the drift Of our domestic women, and may prove 360 Our serving-men, who honours and reveres And who contemns us both, but chiefly thee So gracious and so worthy to be loved. Him then thus answer'd his illustrious son. Trust me, my father! thou shalt soon be taught That I am not of drowsy mind obtuse. But this I think not likely to avail Or thee or me; ponder it yet again; For tedious were the task, farm after farm To visit of those servants, proving each, 370 And the proud suitors merciless devour Meantime thy substance, nor abstain from aught. Learn, if thou wilt, (and I that course myself Advise) who slights thee of the female train, And who is guiltless; but I would not try From house to house the men, far better proved Hereafter, if in truth by signs from heav'n Inform'd, thou hast been taught the will of Jove. Thus they conferr'd. The gallant bark, meantime, Reach'd Ithaca, which from the Pylian shore 380 Had brought Telemachus with all his band. Within the many-fathom'd port arrived His lusty followers haled her far aground, Then carried thence their arms, but to the house Of Clytius the illustrious gifts convey'd. Next to the royal mansion they dispatch'd An herald charg'd with tidings to the Queen, That her Telemachus had reach'd the cot Of good Eumæus, and the bark had sent Home to the city; lest the matchless dame 390 Should still deplore the absence of her son. They, then, the herald and the swine-herd, each Bearing like message to his mistress, met, And at the palace of the godlike Chief Arriving, compass'd by the female throng Inquisitive, the herald thus began. Thy son, O Queen! is safe; ev'n now return'd. Then, drawing nigh to her, Eumæus told His message also from her son received, And, his commission punctually discharged, 400 Leaving the palace, sought his home again. Grief seized and anguish, at those tidings, all The suitors; issuing forth, on the outside Of the high wall they sat, before the gate, When Polybus' son, Eurymachus, began. My friends! his arduous task, this voyage, deem'd By us impossible, in our despight Telemachus hath atchieved. Haste! launch we forth A sable bark, our best, which let us man With mariners expert, who, rowing forth 410 Swiftly, shall summon our companions home. Scarce had he said, when turning where he sat, Amphinomus beheld a bark arrived Just then in port; he saw them furling sail, And seated with their oars in hand; he laugh'd Through pleasure at that sight, and thus he spake. Our message may be spared. Lo! they arrive. Either some God inform'd them, or they saw, Themselves, the vessel of Telemachus Too swiftly passing to be reach'd by theirs. 420 He spake; they, rising, hasted to the shore. Alert they drew the sable bark aground, And by his servant each his arms dispatch'd To his own home. Then, all, to council those Assembling, neither elder of the land Nor youth allow'd to join them, and the rest Eupithes' son, Antinoüs, thus bespake. Ah! how the Gods have rescued him! all day Perch'd on the airy mountain-top, our spies Successive watch'd; and, when the sun declined, 430 We never slept on shore, but all night long Till sacred dawn arose, plow'd the abyss, Hoping Telemachus, that we might seize And slay him, whom some Deity hath led, In our despight, safe to his home again. But frame we yet again means to destroy Telemachus; ah--let not Him escape! For end of this our task, while he survives, None shall be found, such prudence he displays And wisdom, neither are the people now 440 Unanimous our friends as heretofore. Come, then--prevent him, ere he call the Greeks To council; for he will not long delay, But will be angry, doubtless, and will tell Amid them all, how we in vain devised His death, a deed which they will scarce applaud, But will, perhaps, punish and drive us forth From our own country to a distant land.-- Prevent him, therefore, quickly; in the field Slay him, or on the road; so shall his wealth 450 And his possessions on ourselves devolve Which we will share equally, but his house Shall be the Queen's, and his whom