seizing the hot stake rasp'd to a point, Bored his eye with it, and myself, advanced To a superior stand, twirled it about. As when a shipwright with his wimble bores 450 Tough oaken timber, placed on either side Below, his fellow-artists strain the thong Alternate, and the restless iron spins, So, grasping hard the stake pointed with fire, We twirl'd it in his eye; the bubbling blood Boil'd round about the brand; his pupil sent A scalding vapour forth that sing'd his brow, And all his eye-roots crackled in the flame. As when the smith an hatchet or large axe Temp'ring with skill, plunges the hissing blade 460 Deep in cold water, (whence the strength of steel) So hiss'd his eye around the olive-wood. The howling monster with his outcry fill'd The hollow rock, and I, with all my aids, Fled terrified. He, plucking forth the spike From his burnt socket, mad with anguish, cast The implement all bloody far away. Then, bellowing, he sounded forth the name Of ev'ry Cyclops dwelling in the caves Around him, on the wind-swept mountain-tops; 470 They, at his cry flocking from ev'ry part, Circled his den, and of his ail enquired. What grievous hurt hath caused thee, Polypheme! Thus yelling to alarm the peaceful ear Of night, and break our slumbers? Fear'st thou lest Some mortal man drive off thy flocks? or fear'st Thyself to die by cunning or by force? Them answer'd, then, Polypheme from his cave. Oh, friends! I die! and Outis gives the blow. To whom with accents wing'd his friends without. 480 If no man[35] harm thee, but thou art alone, And sickness feel'st, it is the stroke of Jove, And thou must bear it; yet invoke for aid Thy father Neptune, Sovereign of the floods. So saying, they went, and in my heart I laugh'd That by the fiction only of a name, Slight stratagem! I had deceived them all. Then groan'd the Cyclops wrung with pain and grief, And, fumbling, with stretch'd hands, removed the rock From his cave's mouth, which done, he sat him down 490 Spreading his arms athwart the pass, to stop Our egress with his flocks abroad; so dull, It seems, he held me, and so ill-advised. I, pondering what means might fittest prove To save from instant death, (if save I might) My people and myself, to ev'ry shift Inclined, and various counsels framed, as one Who strove for life, conscious of woe at hand. To me, thus meditating, this appear'd The likeliest course. The rams well-thriven were, 500 Thick-fleeced, full-sized, with wool of sable hue. These, silently, with osier twigs on which The Cyclops, hideous monster, slept, I bound, Three in one leash; the intermediate rams Bore each a man, whom the exterior two Preserved, concealing him on either side. Thus each was borne by three, and I, at last, The curl'd back seizing of a ram, (for one I had reserv'd far stateliest of them all) Slipp'd underneath his belly, and both hands 510 Enfolding fast in his exub'rant fleece, Clung ceaseless to him as I lay supine. We, thus disposed, waited with many a sigh The sacred dawn; but when, at length, aris'n, Aurora, day-spring's daughter rosy-palm'd Again appear'd, the males of all his flocks Rush'd forth to pasture, and, meantime, unmilk'd, The wethers bleated, by the load distress'd Of udders overcharged. Their master, rack'd With pain intolerable, handled yet 520 The backs of all, inquisitive, as they stood, But, gross of intellect, suspicion none Conceiv'd of men beneath their bodies bound. And now (none left beside) the ram approach'd With his own wool burthen'd, and with myself, Whom many a fear molested. Polypheme The giant stroak'd him as he sat, and said, My darling ram! why latest of the flock Com'st thou, whom never, heretofore, my sheep Could leave behind, but stalking at their head, 530 Thou first was wont to crop the tender grass, First to arrive at the clear stream, and first With ready will to seek my sheep-cote here At evening; but, thy practice chang'd, thou com'st, Now last of all. Feel'st thou regret, my ram! Of thy poor master's eye, by a vile wretch Bored out, who overcame me first with wine, And by a crew of vagabonds accurs'd, Followers of Outis, whose escape from death Shall not be made to-day? Ah! that thy heart 540 Were as my own, and that distinct as I Thou could'st articulate, so should'st thou tell, Where hidden, he eludes my furious wrath. Then, dash'd against the floor his spatter'd brain Should fly, and I should lighter feel my harm From Outis, wretch base-named and nothing-worth. So saying, he left him to pursue the flock. When, thus drawn forth, we had, at length, escaped Few paces from the cavern and the court, First, quitting my own ram, I loos'd my friends, 550 Then, turning seaward many a thriven ewe Sharp-hoof'd, we drove them swiftly to the ship. Thrice welcome to our faithful friends we came From death escaped, but much they mourn'd the dead. I suffer'd not their tears, but silent shook My brows, by signs commanding them to lift The sheep on board, and instant plow the main. They, quick embarking, on the benches sat Well ranged, and thresh'd with oars the foamy flood; But distant now such length as a loud voice 560 May reach, I hail'd with taunts the Cyclops' ear. Cyclops! when thou devouredst in thy cave With brutal force my followers, thou devour'dst The followers of no timid Chief, or base, Vengeance was sure to recompense that deed Atrocious. Monster! who wast not afraid To eat the guest shelter'd beneath thy roof! Therefore the Gods have well requited thee. I ended; he, exasp'rate, raged the more, And rending from its hold a mountain-top, 570 Hurl'd it toward us; at our vessel's stern Down came the mass, nigh sweeping in its fall The rudder's head. The ocean at the plunge Of that huge rock, high on its refluent flood Heav'd, irresistible, the ship to land. I seizing, quick, our longest pole on board, Back thrust her from the coast and by a nod In silence given, bade my companions ply Strenuous their oars, that so we might escape. Procumbent,[36] each obey'd, and when, the flood 580 Cleaving, we twice that distance had obtain'd,[37] Again I hail'd the Cyclops; but my friends Earnest dissuaded me on ev'ry side. Ah, rash Ulysses! why with taunts provoke The savage more, who hath this moment hurl'd A weapon, such as heav'd the ship again To land, where death seem'd certain to us all? For had he heard a cry, or but the voice Of one man speaking, he had all our heads With some sharp rock, and all our timbers crush'd 590 Together, such vast force is in his arm. So they, but my courageous heart remain'd Unmoved, and thus again, incensed, I spake. Cyclops! should any mortal man inquire To whom thy shameful loss of sight thou ow'st, Say, to Ulysses, city-waster Chief, Laertes' son, native of Ithaca. I ceas'd, and with a groan thus he replied. Ah me! an antient oracle I feel Accomplish'd. Here abode a prophet erst, 600 A man of noblest form, and in his art Unrivall'd, Telemus Eurymedes. He, prophesying to the Cyclops-race, Grew old among us, and presaged my loss Of sight, in future, by Ulysses' hand. I therefore watch'd for the arrival here, Always, of some great Chief, for stature, bulk And beauty prais'd, and cloath'd with wond'rous might. But now--a dwarf, a thing impalpable, A shadow, overcame me first by wine, 610 Then quench'd my sight. Come hither, O my guest! Return, Ulysses! hospitable cheer Awaits thee, and my pray'rs I will prefer To glorious Neptune for thy prosp'rous course; For I am Neptune's offspring, and the God Is proud to be my Sire; he, if he please, And he alone can heal me; none beside Of Pow'rs immortal, or of men below. He spake, to whom I answer thus return'd. I would that of thy life and soul amerced, 620 I could as sure dismiss thee down to Hell, As none shall heal thine eye--not even He. So I; then pray'd the Cyclops to his Sire With hands uprais'd towards the starry heav'n. Hear, Earth-encircler Neptune, azure-hair'd! If I indeed am thine, and if thou boast Thyself my father, grant that never more Ulysses, leveller of hostile tow'rs, Laertes' son, of Ithaca the fair, Behold his native home! but if his fate 630 Decree him yet to see his friends, his house, His native country, let him deep distress'd Return and late, all his companions lost, Indebted for a ship to foreign aid, And let affliction meet him at his door. He spake, and Ocean's sov'reign heard his pray'r. Then lifting from the shore a stone of size Far more enormous, o'er his head he whirl'd The rock, and his immeasurable force Exerting all, dismiss'd it. Close behind 640 The ship, nor distant from the rudder's head, Down came the mass. The ocean at the plunge Of such a weight, high on its refluent flood Tumultuous, heaved the bark well nigh to land. But when we reach'd the isle where we had left Our num'rous barks, and where my people sat Watching with ceaseless sorrow our return, We thrust our vessel to the sandy shore, Then disembark'd, and of the Cyclops' sheep Gave equal share to all. To me alone 650 My fellow-voyagers the ram consign'd In distribution, my peculiar meed. Him, therefore, to cloud-girt Saturnian Jove I offer'd on the shore, burning his thighs In sacrifice; but Jove my hallow'd rites Reck'd not, destruction purposing to all My barks, and all my followers o'er the Deep. Thus, feasting largely, on the shore we sat Till even-tide, and quaffing gen'rous wine; But when day fail'd, and night o'ershadow'd all, 660 Then, on the shore we slept; and when again Aurora rosy daughter of the Dawn, Look'd forth, my people, anxious, I enjoin'd To climb their barks, and cast the hawsers loose. They all obedient, took their seats on board Well-ranged, and thresh'd with oars the foamy flood. Thus, 'scaping narrowly, we roam'd the Deep With aching hearts and with diminish'd crews. FOOTNOTES: [32] So the Scholium interprets in this place, the word ὑπερθιαλος. [33] Λινως [34] Clarke, who has preserved this name in his marginal version, contends strenuously, and with great reason, that Outis ought not to be translated, and in a passage which he quotes from the _Acta eruditorum_, we see much fault found with Giphanius and other interpreters of Homer for having translated it. It is certain that in Homer the word is declined not as ουτις-τινος which signifies no man, but as ουτις-τιδος making ουτιν in the accusative, consequently as a proper name. It is sufficient that the ambiguity was such as to deceive the friends of the Cyclops. Outis is said by some (perhaps absurdly) to have been a name given to Ulysses on account of his having larger ears than common. [35] Outis, as a _name_ could only denote him who bore it; but as a _noun_, it signifies _no man_, which accounts sufficiently for the ludicrous mistake of his brethren. [36] προπεσοντες ------Olli certamine summo Procumbunt. VIRGIL [37] The seeming incongruity of this line with line 560, is reconciled by supposing that Ulysses exerted his voice, naturally loud, in an extraordinary manner on this second occasion. See Clarke. BOOK X ARGUMENT Ulysses, in pursuit of his narrative, relates his arrival at the island of Æolus, his departure thence, and the unhappy occasion of his return thither. The monarch of the winds dismisses him at last with much asperity. He next tells of his arrival among the Læstrygonians, by whom his whole fleet, together with their crews, are destroyed, his own ship and crew excepted. Thence he is driven to the island of Circe. By her the half of his people are transformed into swine. Assisted by Mercury, he resists her enchantments himself, and prevails with the Goddess to recover them to their former shape. In consequence of Circe's instructions, after having spent a complete year in her palace, he prepares for a voyage to the infernal regions. We came to the Æolian isle; there dwells Æolus, son of Hippotas, belov'd By the Immortals, in an isle afloat. A brazen wall impregnable on all sides Girds it, and smooth its rocky coast ascends. His children, in his own fair palace born, Are twelve; six daughters, and six blooming sons. He gave his daughters to his sons to wife; They with their father hold perpetual feast And with their royal mother, still supplied 10 With dainties numberless; the sounding dome Is fill'd with sav'ry odours all the day, And with their consorts chaste at night they sleep On stateliest couches with rich arras spread. Their city and their splendid courts we reach'd. A month complete he, friendly, at his board Regaled me, and enquiry made minute Of Ilium's fall, of the Achaian fleet, And of our voyage thence. I told him all. But now, desirous to embark again, 20 I ask'd dismission home, which he approved, And well provided for my prosp'rous course. He gave me, furnish'd by a bullock slay'd In his ninth year, a bag; ev'ry rude blast Which from its bottom turns the Deep, that bag Imprison'd held; for him Saturnian Jove Hath officed arbiter of all the winds, To rouse their force or calm them, at his will. He gave me them on board my bark, so bound With silver twine that not a breath escaped, 30 Then order'd gentle Zephyrus to fill Our sails propitious. Order vain, alas! So fatal proved the folly of my friends. Nine days continual, night and day we sail'd, And on the tenth my native land appear'd. Not far remote my Ithacans I saw Fires kindling on the coast; but me with toil Worn, and with watching, gentle sleep subdued; For constant I had ruled the helm, nor giv'n That charge to any, fearful of delay. 40 Then, in close conference combined, my crew Each other thus bespake--He carries home Silver and gold from Æolus received, Offspring of Hippotas, illustrious Chief-- And thus a mariner the rest harangued. Ye Gods! what city or what land soe'er Ulysses visits, how is he belov'd By all, and honour'd! many precious spoils He homeward bears from Troy; but we return, (We who the self-same voyage have perform'd) 50 With empty hands. Now also he hath gain'd This pledge of friendship from the King of winds. But come--be quick--search we the bag, and learn What stores of gold and silver it contains. So he, whose mischievous advice prevailed. They loos'd the bag; forth issued all the winds, And, caught by tempests o'er the billowy waste, Weeping they flew, far, far from Ithaca. I then, awaking, in my noble mind Stood doubtful, whether from my vessel's side 60 Immersed to perish in the flood, or calm To endure my sorrows, and content to live. I calm endured them; but around my head Winding my mantle, lay'd me down below, While adverse blasts bore all my fleet again To the Æolian isle; then groan'd my people. We disembark'd and drew fresh water there, And my companions, at their galley's sides All seated, took repast; short meal we made, When, with an herald and a chosen friend, 70 I sought once more the hall of Æolus. Him banqueting with all his sons we found, And with his spouse; we ent'ring, on the floor Of his wide portal sat, whom they amazed Beheld, and of our coming thus enquired. Return'd? Ulysses! by what adverse Pow'r Repuls'd hast thou arrived? we sent thee hence Well-fitted forth to reach thy native isle, Thy palace, or what place soe'er thou would'st. So they--to whom, heart-broken, I replied. 80 My worthless crew have wrong'd me, nor alone My worthless crew, but sleep ill-timed, as much. Yet heal, O friends, my hurt; the pow'r is yours! So I their favour woo'd. Mute sat the sons, But thus their father answer'd. Hence--be gone-- Leave this our isle, thou most obnoxious wretch Of all mankind. I should, myself, transgress, Receiving here, and giving conduct hence To one detested by the Gods as thou. Away--for hated by the Gods thou com'st. 90 So saying, he sent me from his palace forth, Groaning profound; thence, therefore, o'er the Deep We still proceeded sorrowful, our force Exhausting ceaseless at the toilsome oar, And, through our own imprudence, hopeless now Of other furth'rance to our native isle. Six days we navigated, day and night, The briny flood, and on the seventh reach'd The city erst by Lamus built sublime, Proud Læstrygonia, with the distant gates. 100 The herdsman, there, driving his cattle home,[38] Summons the shepherd with his flocks abroad. The sleepless there might double wages earn, Attending, now, the herds, now, tending sheep, For the night-pastures, and the pastures grazed By day, close border, both, the city-walls. To that illustrious port we came, by rocks Uninterrupted flank'd on either side Of tow'ring height, while prominent the shores And bold, converging at the haven's mouth 110 Leave narrow pass. We push'd our galleys in, Then moor'd them side by side; for never surge There lifts its head, or great or small, but clear We found, and motionless, the shelter'd flood. Myself alone, staying my bark without, Secured her well with hawsers to a rock At the land's point, then climb'd the rugged steep, And spying stood the country. Labours none Of men or oxen in the land appear'd, Nor aught beside saw we, but from the earth 120 Smoke rising; therefore of my friends I sent Before me two, adding an herald third, To learn what race of men that country fed. Departing, they an even track pursued Made by the waggons bringing timber down From the high mountains to the town below. Before the town a virgin bearing forth Her ew'r they met, daughter of him who ruled The Læstrygonian race, Antiphatas. Descending from the gate, she sought the fount 130 Artacia; for their custom was to draw From that pure fountain for the city's use. Approaching they accosted her, and ask'd What King reign'd there, and over whom he reign'd. She gave them soon to know where stood sublime The palace of her Sire; no sooner they The palace enter'd, than within they found, In size resembling an huge mountain-top, A woman, whom they shudder'd to behold. She forth from council summon'd quick her spouse 140 Antiphatas, who teeming came with thoughts Of carnage, and, arriving, seized at once A Greecian, whom, next moment, he devoured. With headlong terrour the surviving two Fled to the ships. Then sent Antiphatas His voice through all the town, and on all sides, Hearing that cry, the Læstrygonians flock'd Numberless, and in size resembling more The giants than mankind. They from the rocks Cast down into our fleet enormous stones, 150 A strong man's burthen each; dire din arose Of shatter'd galleys and of dying men, Whom spear'd like fishes to their home they bore, A loathsome prey. While them within the port They slaughter'd, I, (the faulchion at my side Drawn forth) cut loose the hawser of my ship, And all my crew enjoin'd with bosoms laid Prone on their oars, to fly the threaten'd woe. They, dreading instant death tugg'd resupine Together, and the galley from beneath 160 Those beetling[39] rocks into the open sea Shot gladly; but the rest all perish'd there. Proceeding thence, we sigh'd, and roamed the waves, Glad that we lived, but sorrowing for the slain. We came to the Ææan isle; there dwelt The awful Circe, Goddess amber-hair'd, Deep-skill'd in magic song, sister by birth Of the all-wise Æætes; them the Sun, Bright luminary of the world, begat On Perse, daughter of Oceanus. 170 Our vessel there, noiseless, we push'd to land Within a spacious haven, thither led By some celestial Pow'r. We disembark'd, And on the coast two days and nights entire Extended lay, worn with long toil, and each The victim of his heart-devouring woes. Then, with my spear and with my faulchion arm'd, I left the ship to climb with hasty steps An airy height, thence, hoping to espie Some works of man, or hear, perchance, a voice. 180 Exalted on a rough rock's craggy point I stood, and on the distant plain, beheld Smoke which from Circe's palace through the gloom Of trees and thickets rose. That smoke discern'd, I ponder'd next if thither I should haste, Seeking intelligence. Long time I mused, But chose at last, as my discreter course, To seek the sea-beach and my bark again, And, when my crew had eaten, to dispatch Before me, others, who should first enquire. 190 But, ere I yet had reach'd my gallant bark, Some God with pity viewing me alone In that untrodden solitude, sent forth An antler'd stag, full-sized, into my path. His woodland pastures left, he sought the stream, For he was thirsty, and already parch'd By the sun's heat. Him issuing from his haunt, Sheer through the back beneath his middle spine, I wounded, and the lance sprang forth beyond. Moaning he fell, and in the dust expired. 200 Then, treading on his breathless trunk, I pluck'd My weapon forth, which leaving there reclined, I tore away the osiers with my hands And fallows green, and to a fathom's length Twisting the gather'd twigs into a band, Bound fast the feet of my enormous prey, And, flinging him athwart my neck, repair'd Toward my sable bark, propp'd on my lance, Which now to carry shoulder'd as before Surpass'd my pow'r, so bulky was the load. 210 Arriving at the ship, there I let fall My burthen, and with pleasant speech and kind, Man after man addressing, cheer'd my crew. My friends! we suffer much, but shall not seek The shades, ere yet our destined hour arrive. Behold a feast! and we have wine on board-- Pine not with needless famine! rise and eat. I spake; they readily obey'd, and each Issuing at my word abroad, beside The galley stood, admiring, as he lay, 220 The stag, for of no common bulk was he. At length, their eyes gratified to the full With that glad spectacle, they laved their hands, And preparation made of noble cheer. That day complete, till set of sun, we spent Feasting deliciously without restraint, And quaffing generous wine; but when the sun Went down, and darkness overshadow'd all, Extended, then, on Ocean's bank we lay; And when Aurora, daughter of the dawn, 230 Look'd rosy forth, convening all my crew To council, I arose, and thus began. My fellow-voyagers, however worn With num'rous hardships, hear! for neither West Know ye, nor East, where rises, or where sets The all-enlight'ning sun. But let us think, If thought perchance may profit us, of which Small hope I see; for when I lately climb'd Yon craggy rock, plainly I could discern The land encompass'd by the boundless Deep. 240 The isle is flat, and in the midst I saw Dun smoke ascending from an oaken bow'r. So I, whom hearing, they all courage lost, And at remembrance of Antiphatas The Læstrygonian, and the Cyclops' deeds, Ferocious feeder on the flesh of man, Mourn'd loud and wept, but tears could nought avail. Then numb'ring man by man, I parted them In equal portions, and assign'd a Chief To either band, myself to these, to those 250 Godlike Eurylochus. This done, we cast The lots into the helmet, and at once Forth sprang the lot of bold Eurylochus. He went, and with him of my people march'd Twenty and two, all weeping; nor ourselves Wept less, at separation from our friends. Low in a vale, but on an open spot, They found the splendid house of Circe, built With hewn and polish'd stones; compass'd she dwelt By lions on all sides and mountain-wolves 260 Tamed by herself with drugs of noxious pow'rs. Nor were they mischievous, but as my friends Approach'd, arising on their hinder feet, Paw'd them in blandishment, and wagg'd the tail. As, when from feast he rises, dogs around Their master fawn, accustom'd to receive The sop conciliatory from his hand, Around my people, so, those talon'd wolves And lions fawn'd. They, terrified, that troop Of savage monsters horrible beheld. 270 And now, before the Goddess' gates arrived, They heard the voice of Circe singing sweet Within, while, busied at the loom, she wove An ample web immortal, such a work Transparent, graceful, and of bright design As hands of Goddesses alone produce. Thus then Polites, Prince of men, the friend Highest in my esteem, the rest bespake. Ye hear the voice, comrades, of one who weaves An ample web within, and at her task 280 So sweetly chaunts that all the marble floor Re-echoes; human be she or divine I doubt, but let us call, that we may learn. He ceas'd; they call'd; soon issuing at the sound, The Goddess open'd wide her splendid gates, And bade them in; they, heedless, all complied, All save Eurylochus, who fear'd a snare. She, introducing them, conducted each To a bright throne, then gave them Pramnian wine, With grated cheese, pure meal, and honey new, 290 But medicated with her pois'nous drugs Their food, that in oblivion they might lose The wish of home. She gave them, and they drank,-- When, smiting each with her enchanting wand, She shut them in her sties. In head, in voice, In body, and in bristles they became All swine, yet intellected as before, And at her hand were dieted alone With acorns, chestnuts, and the cornel-fruit, Food grateful ever to the grovelling swine. 300 Back flew Eurylochus toward the ship, To tell the woeful tale; struggling to speak, Yet speechless, there he stood, his heart transfixt With anguish, and his eyes deluged with tears. Me boding terrours occupied. At length, When, gazing on him, all had oft enquired, He thus rehearsed to us the dreadful change. Renown'd Ulysses! as thou bad'st, we went Through yonder oaks; there, bosom'd in a vale, But built conspicuous on a swelling knoll 310 With polish'd rock, we found a stately dome. Within, some Goddess or some woman wove An ample web, carolling sweet the while. They call'd aloud; she, issuing at the voice, Unfolded, soon, her splendid portals wide, And bade them in. Heedless they enter'd, all, But I remain'd, suspicious of a snare. Ere long the whole band vanish'd, none I saw Thenceforth, though, seated there, long time I watch'd. He ended; I my studded faulchion huge 320 Athwart my shoulder cast, and seized my bow, Then bade him lead me thither by the way Himself had gone; but with both hands my knees He clasp'd, and in wing'd accents sad exclaim'd. My King! ah lead me not unwilling back, But leave me here; for confident I judge That neither thou wilt bring another thence, Nor come thyself again. Haste--fly we swift With these, for we, at least, may yet escape. So he, to whom this answer I return'd. 330 Eurylochus! abiding here, eat thou And drink thy fill beside the sable bark; I go; necessity forbids my stay. So saying, I left the galley and the shore. But ere that awful vale ent'ring, I reach'd The palace of the sorceress, a God Met me, the bearer of the golden wand, Hermes. He seem'd a stripling in his prime, His cheeks cloath'd only with their earliest down, For youth is then most graceful; fast he lock'd 340 His hand in mine, and thus, familiar, spake. Unhappy! whither, wand'ring o'er the hills, Stranger to all this region, and alone, Go'st thou? Thy people--they within the walls Are shut of Circe, where as swine close-pent She keeps them. Comest thou to set them free? I tell thee, never wilt thou thence return Thyself, but wilt be prison'd with the rest. Yet hearken--I will disappoint her wiles, And will preserve thee. Take this precious drug; 350 Possessing this, enter the Goddess' house Boldly, for it shall save thy life from harm. Lo! I reveal to thee the cruel arts Of Circe; learn them. She will mix for thee A potion, and will also drug thy food With noxious herbs; but she shall not prevail By all her pow'r to change thee; for the force Superior of this noble plant, my gift, Shall baffle her. Hear still what I advise. When she shall smite thee with her slender rod, 360 With faulchion drawn and with death-threat'ning looks Rush on her; she will bid thee to her bed Affrighted; then beware. Decline not thou Her love, that she may both release thy friends, And may with kindness entertain thyself. But force her swear the dreaded oath of heav'n That she will other mischief none devise Against thee, lest she strip thee of thy might, And, quenching all thy virtue, make thee vile. So spake the Argicide, and from the earth 370 That plant extracting, placed it in my hand, Then taught me all its pow'rs. Black was the root, Milk-white the blossom; Moly is its name In heav'n; not easily by mortal man Dug forth, but all is easy to the Gods. Then, Hermes through the island-woods repair'd To heav'n, and I to Circe's dread abode, In gloomy musings busied as I went. Within the vestibule arrived, where dwelt The beauteous Goddess, staying there my steps, 380 I call'd aloud; she heard me, and at once Issuing, threw her splendid portals wide, And bade me in. I follow'd, heart-distress'd. Leading me by the hand to a bright throne With argent studs embellish'd, and beneath Footstool'd magnificent, she made me sit. Then mingling for me in a golden cup My bev'rage, she infused a drug, intent On mischief; but when I had drunk the draught Unchanged, she smote me with her wand, and said. 390 Hence--seek the sty. There wallow with thy friends. She spake; I drawing from beside my thigh My faulchion keen, with death-denouncing looks Rush'd on her; she with a shrill scream of fear Ran under my rais'd arm, seized fast my knees, And in wing'd accents plaintive thus began. Who? whence? thy city and thy birth declare. Amazed I see thee with that potion drench'd, Yet uninchanted; never man before Once pass'd it through his lips, and liv'd the same; 400 But in thy breast a mind inhabits, proof Against all charms. Come then--I know thee well. Thou art Ulysses artifice-renown'd, Of whose arrival here in his return From Ilium, Hermes of the golden wand Was ever wont to tell me. Sheath again Thy sword, and let us, on my bed reclined, Mutual embrace, that we may trust thenceforth Each other, without jealousy or fear. The Goddess spake, to whom I thus replied. 410 O Circe! canst thou bid me meek become And gentle, who beneath thy roof detain'st My fellow-voyagers transform'd to swine? And, fearing my escape, invit'st thou me Into thy bed, with fraudulent pretext Of love, that there, enfeebling by thy arts My noble spirit, thou may'st make me vile? No--trust me--never will I share thy bed Till first, O Goddess, thou consent to swear The dread all-binding oath, that other harm 420 Against myself thou wilt imagine none. I spake. She swearing as I bade, renounced All evil purpose, and (her solemn oath Concluded) I ascended, next, her bed Magnificent. Meantime, four graceful nymphs Attended on the service of the house, Her menials, from the fountains sprung and groves, And from the sacred streams that seek the sea. Of these, one cast fine linen on the thrones, Which, next, with purple arras rich she spread; 430 Another placed before the gorgeous seats Bright tables, and set on baskets of gold. The third, an argent beaker fill'd with wine Delicious, which in golden cups she served; The fourth brought water, which she warm'd within An ample vase, and when the simm'ring flood Sang in the tripod, led me to a bath, And laved me with the pleasant stream profuse Pour'd o'er my neck and body, till my limbs Refresh'd, all sense of lassitude resign'd. 440 When she had bathed me, and with limpid oil Anointed me, and cloathed me in a vest And mantle, next, she led me to a throne Of royal state, with silver studs emboss'd, And footstool'd soft beneath; then came a nymph With golden ewer charged and silver bowl, Who pour'd pure water on my hands, and placed The polish'd board before me, which with food Various, selected from her present stores, The cat'ress spread, then, courteous, bade me eat. 450 But me it pleas'd not; with far other thoughts My spirit teem'd, on vengeance more intent. Soon, then, as Circe mark'd me on my seat Fast-rooted, sullen, nor with outstretch'd hands Deigning to touch the banquet, she approach'd, And in wing'd accents suasive thus began. Why sits Ulysses like the Dumb, dark thoughts His only food? loaths he the touch of meat, And taste of wine? Thou fear'st, as I perceive, Some other snare, but idle is that fear, 460 For I have sworn the inviolable oath. She ceas'd, to whom this answer I return'd. How can I eat? what virtuous man and just, O Circe! could endure the taste of wine Or food, till he should see his prison'd friends Once more at liberty? If then thy wish That I should eat and drink be true, produce My captive people; let us meet again. So I; then Circe, bearing in her hand Her potent rod, went forth, and op'ning wide 470 The door, drove out my people from the sty, In bulk resembling brawns of the ninth year. They stood before me; she through all the herd Proceeding, with an unctuous antidote Anointed each, and at the wholesome touch All shed the swinish bristles by the drug Dread Circe's former magic gift, produced. Restored at once to manhood, they appear'd More vig'rous far, and sightlier than before. They knew me, and with grasp affectionate 480 Hung on my hand. Tears follow'd, but of joy, And with loud cries the vaulted palace rang. Even the awful Goddess felt, herself, Compassion, and, approaching me, began. Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd! Hence to the shore, and to thy gallant bark; First, hale her safe aground, then, hiding all Your arms and treasures in the caverns, come Thyself again, and hither lead thy friends. So spake the Goddess, and my gen'rous mind 490 Persuaded; thence repairing to the beach, I sought my ship; arrived, I found my crew Lamenting miserably, and their cheeks With tears bedewing ceaseless at her side. As when the calves within some village rear'd Behold, at eve, the herd returning home From fruitful meads where they have grazed their fill, No longer in the stalls contain'd, they rush With many a frisk abroad, and, blaring oft, With one consent, all dance their dams around, 500 So they, at sight of me, dissolved in tears Of rapt'rous joy, and each his spirit felt With like affections warm'd as he had reach'd Just then his country, and his city seen, Fair Ithaca, where he was born and rear'd. Then in wing'd accents tender thus they spake. Noble Ulysses! thy appearance fills Our soul with transports, such as we should feel Arrived in safety on our native shore. Speak--say how perish'd our unhappy friends? 510 So they; to whom this answer mild I gave. Hale we our vessel first ashore, and hide In caverns all our treasures and our arms, Then, hasting hence, follow me, and ere long Ye shall behold