himself. Her Neptune lov'd, 70 To whom she bore a son, the mighty prince Nausithoüs, in his day King of the land. Nausithoüs himself two sons begat, Rhexenor and Alcinoüs. Phoebus slew Rhexenor at his home, a bridegroom yet, Who, father of no son, one daughter left, Areta, wedded to Alcinoüs now, And whom the Sov'reign in such honour holds, As woman none enjoys of all on earth Existing, subjects of an husband's pow'r. 80 Like veneration she from all receives Unfeign'd, from her own children, from himself Alcinoüs, and from all Phæacia's race, Who, gazing on her as she were divine, Shout when she moves in progress through the town. For she no wisdom wants, but sits, herself, Arbitress of such contests as arise Between her fav'rites, and decides aright. Her count'nance once and her kind aid secured, Thou may'st thenceforth expect thy friends to see, 90 Thy dwelling, and thy native soil again. So Pallas spake, Goddess cærulean-eyed, And o'er the untillable and barren Deep Departing, Scheria left, land of delight, Whence reaching Marathon, and Athens next, She pass'd into Erectheus' fair abode. Ulysses, then, toward the palace moved Of King Alcinoüs, but immers'd in thought Stood, first, and paused, ere with his foot he press'd The brazen threshold; for a light he saw 100 As of the sun or moon illuming clear The palace of Phæacia's mighty King. Walls plated bright with brass, on either side Stretch'd from the portal to th' interior house, With azure cornice crown'd; the doors were gold Which shut the palace fast; silver the posts Rear'd on a brazen threshold, and above, The lintels, silver, architraved with gold. Mastiffs, in gold and silver, lined the approach On either side, by art celestial framed 110 Of Vulcan, guardians of Alcinoüs' gate For ever, unobnoxious to decay. Sheer from the threshold to the inner house Fixt thrones the walls, through all their length, adorn'd, With mantles overspread of subtlest warp Transparent, work of many a female hand. On these the princes of Phæacia sat, Holding perpetual feasts, while golden youths On all the sumptuous altars stood, their hands With burning torches charged, which, night by night, 120 Shed radiance over all the festive throng. Full fifty female menials serv'd the King In household offices; the rapid mills These turning, pulverize the mellow'd grain, Those, seated orderly, the purple fleece Wind off, or ply the loom, restless as leaves Of lofty poplars fluttering in the breeze; Bright as with oil the new-wrought texture shone.[25] Far as Phæacian mariners all else Surpass, the swift ship urging through the floods, 130 So far in tissue-work the women pass All others, by Minerva's self endow'd With richest fancy and superior skill. Without the court, and to the gates adjoin'd A spacious garden lay, fenced all around Secure, four acres measuring complete. There grew luxuriant many a lofty tree, Pomegranate, pear, the apple blushing bright, The honied fig, and unctuous olive smooth. Those fruits, nor winter's cold nor summer's heat 140 Fear ever, fail not, wither not, but hang Perennial, whose unceasing zephyr breathes Gently on all, enlarging these, and those Maturing genial; in an endless course Pears after pears to full dimensions swell, Figs follow figs, grapes clust'ring grow again Where clusters grew, and (ev'ry apple stript) The boughs soon tempt the gath'rer as before. There too, well-rooted, and of fruit profuse, His vineyard grows; part, wide-extended, basks, 150 In the sun's beams; the arid level glows; In part they gather, and in part they tread The wine-press, while, before the eye, the grapes Here put their blossom forth, there, gather fast Their blackness. On the garden's verge extreme Flow'rs of all hues smile all the year, arranged With neatest art judicious, and amid The lovely scene two fountains welling forth, One visits, into ev'ry part diffus'd, The garden-ground, the other soft beneath 160 The threshold steals into the palace-court, Whence ev'ry citizen his vase supplies. Such were the ample blessings on the house Of King Alcinoüs by the Gods bestow'd. Ulysses wond'ring stood, and when, at length, Silent he had the whole fair scene admired, With rapid step enter'd the royal gate. The Chiefs he found and Senators within Libation pouring to the vigilant spy Mercurius, whom with wine they worshipp'd last 170 Of all the Gods, and at the hour of rest. Ulysses, toil-worn Hero, through the house Pass'd undelaying, by Minerva thick With darkness circumfus'd, till he arrived Where King Alcinoüs and Areta sat. Around Areta's knees his arms he cast, And, in that moment, broken clear away The cloud all went, shed on him from above. Dumb sat the guests, seeing the unknown Chief, And wond'ring gazed. He thus his suit preferr'd. 180 Areta, daughter of the Godlike Prince Rhexenor! suppliant at thy knees I fall, Thy royal spouse imploring, and thyself, (After ten thousand toils) and these your guests, To whom heav'n grant felicity, and to leave Their treasures to their babes, with all the rights And honours, by the people's suffrage, theirs! But oh vouchsafe me, who have wanted long And ardent wish'd my home, without delay Safe conduct to my native shores again! 190 Such suit he made, and in the ashes sat At the hearth-side; they mute long time remain'd, Till, at the last, the antient Hero spake Echeneus, eldest of Phæacia's sons, With eloquence beyond the rest endow'd, Rich in traditionary lore, and wise In all, who thus, benevolent, began. Not honourable to thyself, O King! Is such a sight, a stranger on the ground At the hearth-side seated, and in the dust. 200 Meantime, thy guests, expecting thy command, Move not; thou therefore raising by his hand The stranger, lead him to a throne, and bid The heralds mingle wine, that we may pour To thunder-bearing Jove, the suppliant's friend. Then let the cat'ress for thy guest produce Supply, a supper from the last regale. Soon as those words Alcinoüs heard, the King, Upraising by his hand the prudent Chief Ulysses from the hearth, he made him sit, 210 On a bright throne, displacing for his sake Laodamas his son, the virtuous youth Who sat beside him, and whom most he lov'd. And now, a maiden charg'd with golden ew'r And with an argent laver, pouring, first, Pure water on his hands, supply'd him, next, With a resplendent table, which the chaste Directress of the stores furnish'd with bread And dainties, remnants of the last regale. Then ate the Hero toil-inured, and drank, 220 And to his herald thus Alcinoüs spake. Pontonoüs! mingling wine, bear it around To ev'ry guest in turn, that we may pour To thunder-bearer Jove, the stranger's friend, And guardian of the suppliant's sacred rights. He said; Pontonoüs, as he bade, the wine Mingled delicious, and the cups dispensed With distribution regular to all. When each had made libation, and had drunk Sufficient, then, Alcinoüs thus began. 230 Phæacian Chiefs and Senators, I speak The dictates of my mind, therefore attend! Ye all have feasted--To your homes and sleep. We will assemble at the dawn of day More senior Chiefs, that we may entertain The stranger here, and to the Gods perform Due sacrifice; the convoy that he asks Shall next engage our thoughts, that free from pain And from vexation, by our friendly aid He may revisit, joyful and with speed, 240 His native shore, however far remote. No inconvenience let him feel or harm, Ere his arrival; but, arrived, thenceforth He must endure whatever lot the Fates Spun for him in the moment of his birth. But should he prove some Deity from heav'n Descended, then the Immortals have in view Designs not yet apparent; for the Gods Have ever from of old reveal'd themselves At our solemnities, have on our seats 250 Sat with us evident, and shared the feast; And even if a single traveller Of the Phæacians meet them, all reserve They lay aside; for with the Gods we boast As near affinity as do themselves The Cyclops, or the Giant race profane.[26] To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. Alcinoüs! think not so. Resemblance none In figure or in lineaments I bear To the immortal tenants of the skies, 260 But to the sons of earth; if ye have known A man afflicted with a weight of woe Peculiar, let me be with him compared; Woes even passing his could I relate, And all inflicted on me by the Gods. But let me eat, comfortless as I am, Uninterrupted; for no call is loud As that of hunger in the ears of man; Importunate, unreas'nable, it constrains His notice, more than all his woes beside. 270 So, I much sorrow feel, yet not the less Hear I the blatant appetite demand Due sustenance, and with a voice that drowns E'en all my suff'rings, till itself be fill'd. But expedite ye at the dawn of day My safe return into my native land, After much mis'ry; and let life itself Forsake me, may I but once more behold All that is mine, in my own lofty abode. He spake, whom all applauded, and advised, 280 Unanimous, the guest's conveyance home, Who had so fitly spoken. When, at length, All had libation made, and were sufficed, Departing to his house, each sought repose. But still Ulysses in the hall remain'd, Where, godlike King, Alcinoüs at his side Sat, and Areta; the attendants clear'd Meantime the board, and thus the Queen white-arm'd, (Marking the vest and mantle, which he wore And which her maidens and herself had made) 290 In accents wing'd with eager haste began. Stranger! the first enquiry shall be mine; Who art, and whence? From whom receiv'dst thou these? Saidst not--I came a wand'rer o'er the Deep? To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied. Oh Queen! the task were difficult to unfold In all its length the story of my woes, For I have num'rous from the Gods receiv'd; But I will answer thee as best I may. There is a certain isle, Ogygia, placed 300 Far distant in the Deep; there dwells, by man Alike unvisited, and by the Gods, Calypso, beauteous nymph, but deeply skill'd In artifice, and terrible in pow'r, Daughter of Atlas. Me alone my fate Her miserable inmate made, when Jove Had riv'n asunder with his candent bolt My bark in the mid-sea. There perish'd all The valiant partners of my toils, and I My vessel's keel embracing day and night 310 With folded arms, nine days was borne along. But on the tenth dark night, as pleas'd the Gods, They drove me to Ogygia, where resides Calypso, beauteous nymph, dreadful in pow'r; She rescued, cherish'd, fed me, and her wish Was to confer on me immortal life, Exempt for ever from the sap of age. But me her offer'd boon sway'd not. Sev'n years I there abode continual, with my tears Bedewing ceaseless my ambrosial robes, 320 Calypso's gift divine; but when, at length, (Sev'n years elaps'd) the circling eighth arrived, She then, herself, my quick departure thence Advised, by Jove's own mandate overaw'd, Which even her had influenced to a change. On a well-corded raft she sent me forth With num'rous presents; bread she put and wine On board, and cloath'd me in immortal robes; She sent before me also a fair wind Fresh-blowing, but not dang'rous. Sev'nteen days 330 I sail'd the flood continual, and descried, On the eighteenth, your shadowy mountains tall When my exulting heart sprang at the sight, All wretched as I was, and still ordain'd To strive with difficulties many and hard From adverse Neptune; he the stormy winds Exciting opposite, my wat'ry way Impeded, and the waves heav'd to a bulk Immeasurable, such as robb'd me soon Deep-groaning, of the raft, my only hope; 340 For her the tempest scatter'd, and myself This ocean measur'd swimming, till the winds And mighty waters cast me on your shore. Me there emerging, the huge waves had dash'd Full on the land, where, incommodious most, The shore presented only roughest rocks, But, leaving it, I swam the Deep again, Till now, at last, a river's gentle stream Receiv'd me, by no rocks deform'd, and where No violent winds the shelter'd bank annoy'd. 350 I flung myself on shore, exhausted, weak, Needing repose; ambrosial night came on, When from the Jove-descended stream withdrawn, I in a thicket lay'd me down on leaves Which I had heap'd together, and the Gods O'erwhelm'd my eye-lids with a flood of sleep. There under wither'd leaves, forlorn, I slept All the long night, the morning and the noon, But balmy sleep, at the decline of day, Broke from me; then, your daughter's train I heard 360 Sporting, with whom she also sported, fair And graceful as the Gods. To her I kneel'd. She, following the dictates of a mind Ingenuous, pass'd in her behaviour all Which even ye could from an age like hers Have hoped; for youth is ever indiscrete. She gave me plenteous food, with richest wine Refresh'd my spirit, taught me where to bathe, And cloath'd me as thou seest; thus, though a prey To many sorrows, I have told thee truth. 370 To whom Alcinoüs answer thus return'd. My daughter's conduct, I perceive, hath been In this erroneous, that she led thee not Hither, at once, with her attendant train, For thy first suit was to herself alone. Thus then Ulysses, wary Chief, replied. Blame not, O Hero, for so slight a cause Thy faultless child; she bade me follow them, But I refused, by fear and awe restrain'd, Lest thou should'st feel displeasure at that sight 380 Thyself; for we are all, in ev'ry clime, Suspicious, and to worst constructions prone. So spake Ulysses, to whom thus the King. I bear not, stranger! in my breast an heart Causeless irascible; for at all times A temp'rate equanimity is best. And oh, I would to heav'n, that, being such As now thou art, and of one mind with me, Thou would'st accept my daughter, would'st become My son-in-law, and dwell contented here! 390 House would I give thee, and possessions too, Were such thy choice; else, if thou chuse it not, No man in all Phæacia shall by force Detain thee. Jupiter himself forbid! For proof, I will appoint thee convoy hence To-morrow; and while thou by sleep subdued Shalt on thy bed repose, they with their oars Shall brush the placid flood, till thou arrive At home, or at what place soe'er thou would'st, Though far more distant than Eubœa lies, 400 Remotest isle from us, by the report Of ours, who saw it when they thither bore Golden-hair'd Rhadamanthus o'er the Deep, To visit earth-born Tityus. To that isle They went; they reach'd it, and they brought him thence Back to Phæacia, in one day, with ease. Thou also shalt be taught what ships I boast Unmatch'd in swiftness, and how far my crews Excel, upturning with their oars the brine. He ceas'd; Ulysses toil-inur'd his words 410 Exulting heard, and, praying, thus replied. Eternal Father! may the King perform His whole kind promise! grant him in all lands A never-dying name, and grant to me To visit safe my native shores again! Thus they conferr'd; and now Areta bade Her fair attendants dress a fleecy couch Under the portico, with purple rugs Resplendent, and with arras spread beneath, And over all with cloaks of shaggy pile. 420 Forth went the maidens, bearing each a torch, And, as she bade, prepared in haste a couch Of depth commodious, then, returning, gave Ulysses welcome summons to repose. Stranger! thy couch is spread. Hence to thy rest. So they--Thrice grateful to his soul the thought Seem'd of repose. There slept Ulysses, then, On his carv'd couch, beneath the portico, But in the inner-house Alcinoüs found His place of rest, and hers with royal state 430 Prepared, the Queen his consort, at his side. FOOTNOTES: [25] Καιροσέων δ' οθονεων ἀπολείβεται ὑγρον ἔλαιον. Pope has given no translation of this line in the text of his work, but has translated it in a note. It is variously interpreted by commentators; the sense which is here given of it is that recommended by Eustathius. [26] The Scholiast explains the passage thus--We resemble the Gods in righteousness as much as the Cyclops and Giants resembled each other in impiety. But in this sense of it there is something intricate and contrary to Homer's manner. We have seen that they derived themselves from Neptune, which sufficiently justifies the above interpretation. BOOK VIII ARGUMENT The Phæacians consult on the subject of Ulysses. Preparation is made for his departure. Antinoüs entertains them at his table. Games follow the entertainment. Demodocus the bard sings, first the loves of Mars and Venus, then the introduction of the wooden horse into Troy. Ulysses, much affected by his song, is questioned by Alcinoüs, whence, and who he is, and what is the cause of his sorrow. But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn, Blush'd in the East, then from his bed arose The sacred might of the Phæacian King. Then uprose also, city-waster Chief, Ulysses, whom the King Alcinoüs Led forth to council at the ships convened. There, side by side, on polish'd stones they sat Frequent; meantime, Minerva in the form Of King Alcinoüs' herald ranged the town, With purpose to accelerate the return 10 Of brave Ulysses to his native home, And thus to ev'ry Chief the Goddess spake. Phæacian Chiefs and Senators, away! Haste all to council on the stranger held, Who hath of late beneath Alcinoüs' roof Our King arrived, a wand'rer o'er the Deep, But, in his form, majestic as a God. So saying, she roused the people, and at once The seats of all the senate-court were fill'd With fast-assembling throngs, no few of whom 20 Had mark'd Ulysses with admiring eyes. Then, Pallas o'er his head and shoulders broad Diffusing grace celestial, his whole form Dilated, and to the statelier height advanced, That worthier of all rev'rence he might seem To the Phæacians, and might many a feat Atchieve, with which they should assay his force. When, therefore, the assembly now was full, Alcinoüs, them addressing, thus began. Phæacian Chiefs and Senators! I speak 30 The dictates of my mind, therefore attend. This guest, unknown to me, hath, wand'ring, found My palace, either from the East arrived, Or from some nation on our western side. Safe conduct home he asks, and our consent Here wishes ratified, whose quick return Be it our part, as usual, to promote; For at no time the stranger, from what coast Soe'er, who hath resorted to our doors, Hath long complain'd of his detention here. 40 Haste--draw ye down into the sacred Deep A vessel of prime speed, and, from among The people, fifty and two youths select, Approved the best; then, lashing fast the oars, Leave her, that at my palace ye may make Short feast, for which myself will all provide. Thus I enjoin the crew; but as for those Of sceptred rank, I bid them all alike To my own board, that here we may regale The stranger nobly, and let none refuse. 50 Call, too, Demodocus, the bard divine, To share my banquet, whom the Gods have blest With pow'rs of song delectable, unmatch'd By any, when his genius once is fired. He ceas'd, and led the way, whom follow'd all The sceptred senators, while to the house An herald hasted of the bard divine. Then, fifty mariners and two, from all The rest selected, to the coast repair'd, And, from her station on the sea-bank, launched 60 The galley down into the sacred Deep. They placed the canvas and the mast on board, Arranged the oars, unfurl'd the shining sail, And, leaving her in depth of water moor'd, All sought the palace of Alcinoüs. There, soon, the portico, the court, the hall Were fill'd with multitudes of young and old, For whose regale the mighty monarch slew Two beeves, twelve sheep, and twice four fatted brawns. They slay'd them first, then busily their task 70 Administ'ring, prepared the joyous feast. And now the herald came, leading with care The tuneful bard; dear to the muse was he, Who yet appointed him both good and ill; Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine. For him, Pontonoüs in the midst disposed An argent-studded throne, thrusting it close To a tall column, where he hung his lyre Above his head, and taught him where it hung. He set before him, next, a polish'd board 80 And basket, and a goblet fill'd with wine For his own use, and at his own command. Then, all assail'd at once the ready feast, And when nor hunger more nor thirst they felt, Then came the muse, and roused the bard to sing Exploits of men renown'd; it was a song, In that day, to the highest heav'n extoll'd. He sang of a dispute kindled between The son of Peleus, and Laertes'[27] son, Both seated at a feast held to the Gods. 90 That contest Agamemnon, King of men, Between the noblest of Achaia's host Hearing, rejoiced; for when in Pytho erst He pass'd the marble threshold to consult The oracle of Apollo, such dispute The voice divine had to his ear announced; For then it was that, first, the storm of war Came rolling on, ordain'd long time to afflict Troy and the Greecians, by the will of Jove. So sang the bard illustrious; then his robe 100 Of purple dye with both hands o'er his head Ulysses drew, behind its ample folds Veiling his face, through fear to be observed By the Phæacians weeping at the song; And ever as the bard harmonious ceased, He wiped his tears, and, drawing from his brows The mantle, pour'd libation to the Gods. But when the Chiefs (for they delighted heard Those sounds) solicited again the bard, And he renew'd the strain, then cov'ring close 110 His count'nance, as before, Ulysses wept. Thus, unperceiv'd by all, the Hero mourn'd, Save by Alcinoüs; he alone his tears, (Beside him seated) mark'd, and his deep sighs O'erhearing, the Phæacians thus bespake. Phæacia's Chiefs and Senators, attend! We have regaled sufficient, and the harp Heard to satiety, companion sweet And seasonable of the festive hour. Now go we forth for honourable proof 120 Of our address in games of ev'ry kind, That this our guest may to his friends report, At home arriv'd, that none like us have learn'd To leap, to box, to wrestle, and to run. So saying, he led them forth, whose steps the guests All follow'd, and the herald hanging high The sprightly lyre, took by his hand the bard Demodocus, whom he the self-same way Conducted forth, by which the Chiefs had gone Themselves, for that great spectacle prepared. 130 They sought the forum; countless swarm'd the throng Behind them as they went, and many a youth Strong and courageous to the strife arose. Upstood Acroneus and Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, after whom Anchialus with Anabeesineus Arose, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus bold, Amphialus and Thöon. Then arose, In aspect dread as homicidal Mars, Euryalus, and for his graceful form 140 (After Laodamas) distinguish'd most Of all Phæacia's sons, Naubolides. Three also from Alcinoüs sprung, arose, Laodamas, his eldest; Halius, next, His second-born; and godlike Clytoneus. Of these, some started for the runner's prize. They gave the race its limits.[28] All at once Along the dusty champaign swift they flew. But Clytoneus, illustrious youth, outstripp'd All competition; far as mules surpass 150 Slow oxen furrowing the fallow ground, So far before all others he arrived Victorious, where the throng'd spectators stood. Some tried the wrestler's toil severe, in which Euryalus superior proved to all. In the long leap Amphialus prevail'd; Elatreus most successful hurled the quoit, And at the cestus,[29] last, the noble son Of Scheria's King, Laodamas excell'd. When thus with contemplation of the games 160 All had been gratified, Alcinoüs' son Laodamas, arising, then address'd. Friends! ask we now the stranger, if he boast Proficiency in aught. His figure seems Not ill; in thighs, and legs, and arms he shews Much strength, and in his brawny neck; nor youth Hath left him yet, though batter'd he appears With num'rous troubles, and misfortune-flaw'd. Nor know I hardships in the world so sure To break the strongest down, as those by sea. 170 Then answer thus Euryalus return'd. Thou hast well said, Laodamas; thyself Approaching, speak to him, and call him forth. Which when Alcinoüs' noble offspring heard, Advancing from his seat, amid them all He stood, and to Ulysses thus began. Stand forth, oh guest, thou also; prove thy skill (If any such thou hast) in games like ours, Which, likeliest, thou hast learn'd; for greater praise Hath no man, while he lives, than that he know 180 His feet to exercise and hands aright. Come then; make trial; scatter wide thy cares, We will not hold thee long; the ship is launch'd Already, and the crew stand all prepared. To whom replied the wily Chief renown'd Wherefore, as in derision, have ye call'd Me forth, Laodamas, to these exploits? No games have I, but many a grief, at heart, And with far other struggles worn, here sit Desirous only of conveyance home, 190 For which both King and people I implore. Then him Euryalus aloud reproach'd. I well believ'd it, friend! in thee the guise I see not of a man expert in feats Athletic, of which various are perform'd In ev'ry land; thou rather seem'st with ships Familiar; one, accustom'd to controul Some crew of trading mariners; well-learn'd In stowage, pilotage, and wealth acquired By rapine, but of no gymnastic pow'rs. 200 To whom Ulysses, frowning dark, replied. Thou hast ill spoken, sir, and like a man Regardless whom he wrongs. Therefore the Gods Give not endowments graceful in each kind, Of body, mind, and utt'rance, all to one. This man in figure less excels, yet Jove Crowns him with eloquence; his hearers charm'd Behold him, while with modest confidence He bears the prize of fluent speech from all, And in the streets is gazed on as a God! 210 Another, in his form the Pow'rs above Resembles, but no grace around his words Twines itself elegant. So, thou in form Hast excellence to boast; a God, employ'd To make a master-piece in human shape, Could but produce proportions such as thine; Yet hast thou an untutor'd intellect. Thou much hast moved me; thy unhandsome phrase Hath roused my wrath; I am not, as thou say'st, A novice in these sports, but took the lead 220 In all, while youth and strength were on my side. But I am now in bands of sorrow held, And of misfortune, having much endured In war, and buffeting the boist'rous waves. Yet, though with mis'ry worn, I will essay My strength among you; for thy words had teeth Whose bite hath pinch'd and pain'd me to the proof. He said; and mantled as he was, a quoit Upstarting, seized, in bulk and weight all those Transcending far, by the Phæacians used. 230 Swiftly he swung, and from his vig'rous hand Sent it. Loud sang the stone, and as it flew The maritime Phæacians low inclined Their heads beneath it; over all the marks, And far beyond them, sped the flying rock. Minerva, in a human form, the cast Prodigious measur'd, and aloud exclaim'd. Stranger! the blind himself might with his hands Feel out the 'vantage here. Thy quoit disdains Fellowship with a crowd, borne far beyond. 240 Fear not a losing game; Phæacian none Will reach thy measure, much less overcast. She ceased; Ulysses, hardy Chief, rejoiced That in the circus he had found a judge So favorable, and with brisker tone, As less in wrath, the multitude address'd. Young men, reach this, and I will quickly heave Another such, or yet a heavier quoit. Then, come the man whose courage prompts him forth To box, to wrestle with me, or to run; 250 For ye have chafed me much, and I decline No strife with any here, but challenge all Phæacia, save Laodamas alone. He is mine host. Who combats with his friend? To call to proof of hardiment the man Who entertains him in a foreign land, Would but evince the challenger a fool, Who, so, would cripple his own interest there. As for the rest, I none refuse, scorn none, But wish for trial of you, and to match 260 In opposition fair my force with yours. There is no game athletic in the use Of all mankind, too difficult for me; I handle well the polish'd bow, and first Amid a thousand foes strike whom I mark, Although a throng of warriors at my side Imbattled, speed their shafts at the same time. Of all Achaia's sons who erst at Troy Drew bow, the sole who bore the prize from me Was Philoctetes; I resign it else 270 To none now nourish'd with the fruits of earth. Yet mean I no comparison of myself With men of antient times, with Hercules, Or with Oechalian Eurytus, who, both, The Gods themselves in archery defied. Soon, therefore, died huge Eurytus, ere yet Old age he reach'd; him, angry to be call'd To proof of archership, Apollo slew. But if ye name the spear, mine flies a length By no man's arrow reach'd; I fear no foil 280 From the Phæacians, save in speed alone; For I have suffer'd hardships, dash'd and drench'd By many a wave, nor had I food on board At all times, therefore I am much unstrung. He spake; and silent the Phæacians sat, Of whom alone Alcinoüs thus replied. Since, stranger, not ungraceful is thy speech, Who hast but vindicated in our ears Thy question'd prowess, angry that this youth Reproach'd thee in the presence of us all, 290 That no man qualified to give his voice In public, might affront thy courage more; Now mark me, therefore, that in time to come, While feasting with thy children and thy spouse, Thou may'st inform the Heroes of thy land Even of our proficiency in arts By Jove enjoin'd us in our father's days. We boast not much the boxer's skill, nor yet The wrestler's; but light-footed in the race Are we, and navigators well-inform'd. 300 Our pleasures are the feast, the harp, the dance, Garments for change; the tepid bath; the bed. Come, ye Phæacians, beyond others skill'd To tread the circus with harmonious steps, Come, play before us; that our guest, arrived In his own country, may inform his friends How far in seamanship we all excel, In running, in the dance, and in the song. Haste! bring ye to Demodocus his lyre Clear-toned, left somewhere in our hall at home. 310 So spake the godlike King, at whose command The herald to the palace quick return'd To seek the charming lyre. Meantime arose Nine arbiters, appointed to intend The whole arrangement of the public games, To smooth the circus floor, and give the ring Its compass, widening the attentive throng. Ere long the herald came, bearing the harp, With which Demodocus supplied, advanced Into the middle area, around whom 320 Stood blooming youths, all skilful in the dance. With footsteps justly timed all smote at once The sacred floor; Ulysses wonder-fixt, The ceaseless play of twinkling[30] feet admired. Then, tuning his sweet chords, Demodocus A jocund strain began, his theme, the loves Of Mars and Cytherea chaplet-crown'd; How first, clandestine, they embraced beneath The roof of Vulcan, her, by many a gift Seduced, Mars won, and with adult'rous lust 330 The bed dishonour'd of the King of fire. The sun, a witness of their amorous sport, Bore swift the tale to Vulcan; he, apprized Of that foul deed, at once his smithy sought, In secret darkness of his inmost soul Contriving vengeance; to the stock he heav'd His anvil huge, on which he forged a snare Of bands indissoluble, by no art To be untied, durance for ever firm. The net prepared, he bore it, fiery-wroth, 340 To his own chamber and his nuptial couch, Where, stretching them from post to post, he wrapp'd With those fine meshes all his bed around, And hung them num'rous from the roof, diffused Like spiders' filaments, which not the Gods Themselves could see, so subtle were the toils. When thus he had encircled all his bed On ev'ry side, he feign'd a journey thence To Lemnos, of all cities that adorn The earth, the city that he favours most. 350 Nor kept the God of the resplendent reins Mars, drowsy watch, but seeing that the famed Artificer of heav'n had left his home, Flew to the house of Vulcan, hot to enjoy The Goddess with the wreath-encircled brows. She, newly from her potent Sire return'd The son of Saturn, sat. Mars, ent'ring, seiz'd Her hand, hung on it, and thus urg'd his suit. To bed, my fair, and let us love! for lo! Thine husband is from home, to Lemnos gone, 360 And to the Sintians, men of barb'rous speech. He spake, nor she was loth, but bedward too Like him inclined; so then, to bed they went, And as they lay'd them down, down stream'd the net Around them, labour exquisite of hands By ingenuity divine inform'd. Small room they found, so prison'd; not a limb Could either lift, or move, but felt at once Entanglement from which was no escape. And now the glorious artist, ere he yet 370 Had reach'd the Lemnian isle, limping, return'd From his feign'd journey, for his spy the sun Had told him all. With aching heart he sought His home, and, standing in the vestibule, Frantic with indignation roar'd to heav'n, And roar'd again, summoning all the Gods.-- Oh Jove! and all ye Pow'rs for ever blest! Here; hither look, that ye may view a sight Ludicrous, yet too monstrous to be borne, How Venus always with dishonour loads 380 Her cripple spouse, doating on fiery Mars! And wherefore? for that he is fair in form And sound of foot, I ricket-boned and weak. Whose fault is this? Their fault, and theirs alone Who gave me being; ill-employ'd were they Begetting me, one, better far unborn. See where they couch together on my bed Lascivious! ah, sight hateful to my eyes! Yet cooler wishes will they feel, I ween, To press my bed hereafter; here to sleep 390 Will little please them, fondly as they love. But these my toils and tangles will suffice To hold them here, till Jove shall yield me back Complete, the sum of all my nuptial gifts Paid to him for the shameless strumpet's sake His daughter, as incontinent as fair. He said, and in the brazen-floor'd abode Of Jove the Gods assembled. Neptune came Earth-circling Pow'r; came Hermes friend of man, And, regent of the far-commanding bow, 400 Apollo also came; but chaste reserve Bashful kept all the Goddesses at home. The Gods, by whose beneficence all live, Stood in the portal; infinite arose The laugh of heav'n, all looking down intent On that shrewd project of the smith divine, And, turning to each other, thus they said. Bad works speed ill. The slow o'ertakes the swift. So Vulcan, tardy as he is, by craft Hath outstript Mars, although the fleetest far 410 Of all who dwell in heav'n, and the light-heel'd Must pay the adult'rer's forfeit to the lame. So spake the Pow'rs immortal; then the King Of radiant shafts thus question'd Mercury. Jove's son, heaven's herald, Hermes, bounteous God! Would'st _thou_ such stricture close of bands endure For golden Venus lying at thy