he came to lonely Sita, for each warlike chief was gone, As the darkness comes to evening lightless from the parted Sun. And he cast his eyes on Ska, as a grata casts its shade ' On the beauteous star Rohini when the bright Moon's glories fade. Quaking Nature knew the moment ; silent stood the forest trees, Conscious of a deed of darkness fell the fragrant forest breeze, Godavari's troubled waters trembled 'neath his lurid glance, And his red eye's fiery lustre sparkled in the wavelets' dance ! SITA LOST 97 Mute and still were forest creatures when in guise of anchorite* Unto Sita's lonely cottage pressed the Raksha in his might, Mute and voiceless was the jungle as he cast on her his eye, As across the star of Chitra, planet. Sani walks the sky ! Ravan stood in hermit's vestments, — vengefal purpose unrevealed, — As a deep and darksome cavern is by grass and leaf concealed, ''Ravan stood sedate and silent, and he gazed on Rama's queen, Ivory brow and lip of coral, sparkling teeth of pearly sheen ! Lighting up the lonely cottage Sita sat in radiance high, As the Moon with streaks of silver fills the lonely midnight sky, Lighting up the gloomy woodlands with her eyes serenely fair, With her bark-clad shape of beauty mantled by her raven hair ! Ravan fired by impure passion fixed on her his lustful eye, And the light that lit his glances gave his holy texts the lie, Ravan in his flattering accents, with a soft and soothing art, Praised the woman's peerless beauty to subdue the woman's heart : " Beaming in thy golden beauty, robed in sylvan russet dress, Wearing wreath of fragrant lotus like a nymph of wilderness, Art thou Sri or radiant Gauri, maid of Fortune or of Fame, Nymph of Love or sweet Fruition, what may be thy sacred name ? On thy lips of ruddy coral teeth of tender jasmine shine, In thy eyes of limpid lustre dwells a light of love divine, Tall and slender, softly rounded, are thy limbs of beauty rare, Like the swelling fruit of tola heaves thy bosom sweetly fair ! Smiling lips that tempt and ravish, lustre that thy dark eyes beam, Crush ray heart, as rolling waters crush the margin of the stream, And thy wealth of waving tresses mantles o'er thy budding charms. And thy waist of slender beauty courts a lover's circling arms ! 98 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Goddess or Gandharva maiden wears no brighter form or face, Woman seen by eyes of mortals owns not such transcendent grace, Wherefore then, in lonesome forest, nymph or maiden, make thy stay, Where the jungle creatures wander and the Rakshas hold their sway ? Royal halls and stately mansions were for thee a meeter home, And thy steps should grace a palace, not in pathless forest roam, Blossoms rich, not thorn of jungle, decorate a lady's bower, Silken robes, not sylvan garments, heighten Beauty's potent power ! Lady of the sylvan forest ! other destiny is thine, — As a bride beloved and courted in thy bridal garments shine, Choose a loved and lordly suitor who shall wait on thee in pride, Choose a hero worth thy beauty, be a monarch's queenly bride ! Speak thy lineage, heaven-descended ! who may be thy parents high, Rudras or the radiant Maruts, Vasus leaders of the sky, All unworthy is this forest for a nymph or heavenly maid, Beasts of prey infest the jungle, Rakshas haunt its gloomy shade, Lions dwell in lovely caverns, tuskers ford the silent lake, Monkeys sport on pendant branches, tigers steal beneath the brake, Wherefore then this dismal forest doth thy fairy face adorn, Who art thou and whence descended, nymph or maid or goddess- born?" VI Ravan's Wooing " Listen, Brahman ! " answered Sita, — unsuspecting in her mind That she saw a base betrayer in a hermit seeming kind, — " I am born of royal Janak, ruler of Videha's land, Rama prince of proud Kosala by his valour won my hand. /, SITA LOST 99 Years we pawed in peaceful pleasure in Ayodhya's happy clime. Rich in every rare enjoyment gladsome passed our happy time, Till the monarch Dasa-ratba,-r-for his days were almost done, — Wished to crown the royal Rama as his Heir and Regent son. But the scheming Queen Kaikeyi claimed a long-forgotten boon, That my consort should be exiled and her son should fill the throne, She would take no rest or slumber, nourishment of drink or food, Till her Bharat ruled the empire, Rama banished to the wood \ Five and twenty righteous summers graced my good and gracious lord, I True to faith and true to duty, true in purpose deed and word, / Loved of all his loyal people, rich in valour and in fame, For the rite of consecration Rama to his father came. Spake Kaikeyi to my husband : — * List thy father's promise fair, Bharat shall be ruling monarch, do thou to the woods repair,' — Ever gentle, ever duteous, Rama listened to obey, And through woods and pathless jungles we have held our lonely way ! This, O pions-hearted hermit, is his story of distress, And his young and faithful brother follows him in wilderness, Lion in his warlike valour, hermit in his saintly vow, Lakshman with his honoured elder wanders through the forest now. Rest thee here, O holy Brahman, rich in piety and fame, Till the forest-ranging brothers greet thee with the forest game, /Speak, if so it please thee, father, what great rishi claims thy birth, Wherefore in this pathless jungle wand'rest friendless on this earth." " Brahman nor a righteous rishi" royal Ravan made reply, " Leader of the wrathful Rakshas, Lanka's lord and king am I, He whose valour quells the wide* world, Gods above and men below, He whose proud and peerless prowess Rakshas and Asuras know ! ioo THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA But thy beauty's golden lustre, Ska, wins my royal heart, Be a sharer of my empire, of my glory take a part, ' Many queens of queenly beauty on the royal Ravan wait, Thou shalt be their reigning empress, thou shalt own my regal state! Lanka girt by boundless ocean is of royal towns the best, Seated in her pride and glory on a mountain's towering crest, And in mountain paths and woodlands thou shalt with thy Ravan stray, Not in Godavari 8 gorges through the dark and dreary day, And fife thousand gay-dressed damsels shall upon my Sita wait, Queen of Ravan's true affection, proud partaker of his state ! " Sparkled Sita's eyes in anger and a tremor shook her frame, As in proud and scornful accents answered thus the royal dame : " Knowest thou Rama great and godlike, peerless hero in the strife, Deep, uncompassed, like the ocean ? — I am Rama's wedded wife ! Knowest thou Rama proud and princely, sinless in his saintly life, Stately as the tall Nyagrodha P — I am Rama's wedded wife 1 Mighty-arm£d, mighty-chested, mighty with his bow and sword, Lion midst the sons of mortals, — Rama is my wedded lord ! Stainless as the Moon in glory, stainless in his deed and word, Rich in valour and in virtue, — Rama is my wedded lord ! Sure thy fitful life is shadowed by a dark and dreadful fate, Since in frenzy of thy passion courtest thou a warrior's mate, Tear the tooth of hungry lion while upon the calf he feeds, Touch the fang of deadly cobra while his dying victim bleeds, Aye uproot the solid mountain from ks base of rocky land, Ere thou win the wife of Rama stout oi heart and strong of hand ! SITA LOST 101 Pierce thy eye with point of needle tillit racks thy tortured head, Press thy red tongue defraud bkeding'on the. razor's shining blade, Hurl thyself upon the ocean from a towering peak and high, Snatch the orbs of day and midnight from their spheres in azure sky, Tongues of flaming conflagration in thy flowing dress enfold, Ere thou take the wife of Rama to thy distant dungeon hold, ' Ere thou seek to insult Rama unrelenting in his wrath, O'er a bed of pikes of iron tread a softer easier path ! ** VII Ravan's Triumph Vain her threat and soft entreaty, Ravan held her in his wrath, As the planet Budha captures fair Rohini in his path, By his left hand tremor-shaken, Ravan heW her streaming hair, By his right the ruthless Raksha lifted up the fainting fair ! Unseen dwellers of the woodlands watched the dismal deed of shame, Marked the mighty-armed Raksha lift the poor and helpless dame, Seat her on his car celestial yoked with asses winged with speed, Golden in its shape and radiance, fleet as Indra's heavenly steed ! ' Angry threat and sweet entreaty Ravan to her ears addressed, As the struggling fainting woman still he held upon his breast, Vain his threat and vain entreaty, " Rama ! Rama ! " still she cried, To the dark and distant forest where her noble lord had hied. Then arose the car celestial o'er the hill and wooded vale, Like a snake in eagle's talons Sita writhed with piteous wail, Dim and dizzy, faint and faltering, still she sent her piercing cry, Echoing through the boundless woodlands, pealing to the upper sky : 102 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA •« Save me* imghty-arm&l Lakshman, stainless in thy heart and deed, Sare a faithful wife and woman from a Raksha's hist and greed, True and faithful was thy warning, — false and foul the charge I made, Pardon, friend, an erring sister, pardon words a woman said ! Help me, ever righteous Rama, duty bade thee yield thy throne, Duty bids thee smite the sinful, save the wife who is thy own, Thou art king and stern chastiser of each deed of sin and shame, Hurl thy rengeance on the Raksha who insults thy faithful dame ! Deed of sin, unrighteous Ravan, brings in time its dreadful meed, As the young corn grows and ripens from the small and living seed, For this deed of insult, Ravan, in thy heedless folly done. Death of all thy race and kindred thou shalt reap from Raghu's son / Darksome woods of Panchavati, Janasthana's smiling rale, Flowering trees and winding creepers, murmur to my lord this tale, (] Sweet companions of my exile, friends who cheered my woodland stay, Speak to Rama, that his Sita rathless Ravan bears away ! , v' Towering peaks and lofty mountains, wooded hills sublime and high, Far-extending gloomy ranges heaving to the azure sky, In your voice of pealing thunder to my lord and consort say, Speak to Rama, that his Sita ruthless Ravan bears away ! Unseen dwellers of the woodlands, spirits of the rock aqd fell, Sita renders you obeisance as she speaks her sad farewell, Whisper to my righteous Rama when he seeks his homeward way, Speak to Rama, that hk Sita ruthless Ravan bears away ! Ah, my Rama, true and tender ! thou hast loved me as thy U&, From the foul and impious Raksha thou shalt still redeem thy wife, SITA LOST 103 Ah, my Rama, mighty-armed ! vengeance soon shall speed thy way, When thou nearest, helpless Sita is by Ravan torn away ! And thou royal bird, Jatayu, witness Ravan's deed of shame, Witness how he courts destruction, stealing Rama's faithful dame, Rama and the gallant Laksbman soon shall find their destined prey, When they know that trusting Sita is by Ravan torn away ! " Vainly wept the anguished Sita ; vain Jatayu in his wrath, Fought with beak and bloody talons to impede the Raksha's path, Pierced and bleeding fell the vulture; Ravan fled with Rama's bride, Where amidst the boundless ocean Lanka rose in towering pride ! BOOK VII KISHKINDHA (In the NiJgiri Mountains) 13 AMA'S wanderings in the Nilgiri mountains, and his alliance with Srugriva the chief of these regions, form the subject of the Book. With that contempt for aboriginal races which has marked civilized conquerors in all ages, the poet describes the dwellers of these regions as monkeys and bears. But the modern reader sees through these strange epithets; and in the descrip- tion of the social and domestic manners, the arts and industries, the sacred rites and ceremonies, and the civic and political life of the Vanars, the reader will find that the poet even imports Aryan customs into his account of the dwellers of Southern India. They formed an alliance with Rama, they fought for him and triumphed with him, and they helped him to recover his wife from the king of Ceylon. The portions translated in this Book form Sections v., xv., xvi., xx vi., a portion of Section xxviii., and an abstract of Sec- tions xl. to xliii. of Book iv. of the original text. Friends in Misfortune Long and loud lamented Rama by his lonesome cottage door, Janasthana's woodlands answered, Panchavati's echoing shore„ Long he searched in wood and jungle, mountain crest and pathless plain, Till he reached the Malya mountains stretching to the southern main. \ IN THE NILGIRI MOUNTAINS 105 There Sugriva king of Vanars, Hanuman his henchman brave, Banished from their home and empire lived within the forest cave, To the exiled king Sugriva, Hanuman his purpose told, As he marked the pensive Rama wand' ring with his brother bold : " Mark the sons of Dasa-ratha banished from their royal home, Duteous to their father's mandate in these pathless forests roam, Great was monarch Dasa-ratha famed for sacrifice divine, Raja-suya, Aswa-medha, and for gift of gold and kine, By a monarch's stainless duty people's love the monarch won, By a woman's false contrivance banished he his eldest son ! True to duty, true to virtue, Rama passed his forest life, Till a false perfidious Raksha stole his fair and faithful wife, And the anguish-stricken husband seeks thy friendship and thy aid, — Mutual sorrow blends your fortunes, be ye friends in mutual need ! " Bold Sugriva heard the counsel, and to righteous Rama hied, And the princes of Ayodhya with his greetings gratified : " Well I know thee, righteous Rama, soul of piety and love, And thy duty to thy father and thy faith in Gods above, Fortune favours poor Sugriva, Rama courts his humble aid, In our deepest direst danger be our truest friendship made
