! Wherefore for a father's mandate leave thy empire and thy throne, Pass thy days in trackless jungle sacrificing all thy own, Wherefore to Ayodhya's city, as to longing wife's embrace, Speed'st thou not to rule thy empire, lord of Raghu's royal race ? Dasa-ratha claims no duty, and his will is empty word, j View him as a foreign monarch, of thy realm thou art the lord,) Dasa-ratha is departed, gone where all the mortals go, For a dead man's idle mandate wherefore lead this life of woe ? Ah ! I weep for erring mortals who on erring duty bent Sacrifice their dear enjoyment till their barren life is spent, Who to Gods and to the Fathers vainly still their offerings make, Waste of food ! for God nor Father doth our pious homage take ! And the food by one partaken, can it nourish other men, Food bestowed upon a Brahman, can it serve our Fathers then ? Crafty priests have forged these maxims and with selfish objects say, — / Make thy gifts and do thy penance, leave thy worldly wealth and pray !1 There is no Hereafter, Rama, vain the hope and creed of men, Seek the pleasures of the_present, spurn illusions poor and vain, Take the course of sense and wisdom, cast all idle faith aside, Take the kingdom Bharat offers, rule Ayodhya in thy pride ! " " Fair thy purpose," answered Rama, " false thy reason leads astray, Tortuous wisdom brings no profit, virtue shuns the crooked way, For the deed proclaims the hero from the man of spacious lies, Marks the true and upright Arya from the scheming worldly-wise ! 72 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA If assuming virtue's mantle I should seek the sinful path, God 8 who judge our secret motives curse me with their deepest wrath, And thy counsel helps not, rishi, mansions of the sky to win, And a king his subjects follow adding deeper sin to sin ! I /Sweep aside thy crafty reasoning, Truth is still our ancient way, I Truth sustains the earth and nations and a monarch's righteous sway, Mighty Gods and holy sages find in Truth their haven shore, Scorning death and dark destruction, Truth survives for evermore ! Deadlier than the serpent's venom is the venom of a lie, From the false, than from the cobra, men with deeper terror fly, Dearer than the food to mortals, Truth as nourishment is given, Truth sustains the wide creation, Truth upholds the highest heaven ! Vain were gifts and sacrifices, rigid penances were vain, Profitless the holy Vedas but for Truth which they sustain, Gifts and rites and rigid penance have no aim or purpose high, Save in Truth which rules the wide earth and the regions of the sky ! I have plighted truth and promise and my word may not unsay, Fourteen years in pathless forests father's mandate I obey, And I seek no spacious reasons my relinquished throne to win, Gods nor Fathers nor the Vedas counsel tortuous paths of sin ! Pardon, rishi, still unchanging shall remain my promise given To my mother Queen Kaikeyi, to my father now in heaven, Pardon, rishi, still in jungle we shall seek the forest fare, Worship Gods who watch our actions, and pervade the earth and air ! Unto Agni, unto Vayu, shall my constant prayers run, I shall live like happy Indra, hundred sacrifices done, And the deep and darksome jungle shall be Rama's royal hall, ; — i For a righteous father* s mandate duteous son may not recall I "/ THE MEETING OF THE PRINCES 73 The Sandals Tears nor sighs nor sad entreaty Rama's changeless purpose shook, Till once more with hands conjoined Bharat to his elder spoke : " Rama, true to royal mercy, true to duties of thy race, Grant this favour to thy mother, to thy brother grant this grace, Vain were my unaided efforts to protect our father's throne, Town and hamlet, lord and tiller, turn to thee and thee alone ! Unto Rama, friends and kinsmen, chiefs and warriors, turn in pain, And each city chief and elder, and each humble Tillage swain, Base thy empire strong, unshaken, on a loyal nation's will, With thy worth and with thy valour serve thy faithful people still ! " Rama raised the prostrate Bharat to his ever-loving breast, And in voice of tuneful hansa thus his gentle speech addrest : " Trust me, Bharat, lofty virtue, strength and will to thee belong, Thou could'st rule a world-wide empire in thy faith and purpose strong, And our father's ancient min'sters, ever faithful, wise and deep, They shall help thee with their counsel and thy ancient frontiers keep. List ! the Moon may lose his lustre, Himalaya lose his snow, i Heaving Ocean pass his confines surging from the caves below, \ But the truth-abiding Rama will not move from promise given, \ He hath spoke and will not palter, help him righteous Gods in heaven ! * Blazing like the Sun in splendour, beauteous like the Lord of Night, Rama vowed his Vow of Duty, changeless in his holy might ! '* Humble token," answered Bharat, "still I seek from Rama's hand, Token of his love and kindness, token of his high command, 74 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA IFrom thy feet cast forth those sandals, they shall decorate the throne, They shall nerve my heart to duty and shall safely guard thy own, They shall to a loyal nation absent monarch's will proclaim, Watch the frontiers of the empire and the people's homage claim ! " Rama gave the loosened sandals as his younger humbly prayed, Bharat bowed to them in homage and his parting purpose said : " Not alone will banished Rama barks and matted tresses wear, Fourteen years the crowned Bharat will in hermit's dress appear, Henceforth Bharat dwells in palace guised as hermit of the wood, In the sumptuous hall of feasting wild fruit is his only food, f Fourteen years shall pass in waiting, weary toil and penance dire, \Then, if Rama comes not living, Bharat dies upon the pyre ! " VI The Hermitge of Atri With the sandals of his elder Bharat to Ayodhya went, Rama sought for deeper forests on his arduous duty bent, Wandering with his wife and Lakshman slowly sought the hermitage, I Where resided saintly Atri, Vedic Bard and ancient sage. Anasuya, wife of Atri, votaress of Gods above, Welcomed Sita in her cottage, tended her with mother's love, Gave her robe and holy garland, jewelled ring and chain of gold, Heard the tale of love and sadness which the soft-eyed Sita told : How the monarch of Videha held the plough and tilled the earthy From the furrow made by ploughshare infant Sita sprang to birth, THE MEETING OF THE PRINCES 75 How the monarch of Videha welcomed kings of worth and pride, Rama 'midst the gathered monarchs broke the bow and won the bride. How by Queeil Kaikeyi's mandate Rama lost his father's throne, Sita followed him in exile in the forest dark and lone ! Softly from the lips of Sita words of joy and sorrow fell, And the pure-souled pious priestess wept to hear the tender tale, And she kissed her on the forehead, held her on her ancient breast, And in mother's tender accents thus her gentle thoughts exprest : *« Sweet the tale you tell me, Sita, of thy wedding and thy love, Of the true and tender Rama, righteous as the Gods above, And thy wifely deep devotion fills my heart with purpose high, Stay with us my gentle daughter for the night shades gather nigh. Hastening from each distent region feathered songsters seek their nest, Twitter in the leafy thickets ere they seek their nightly rest, Hastening from their pure ablutions with their pitchers smooth and fair, In their dripping barks the hermits to their evening rites repair, And in sacred agni-hotra holy anchorites engage, And a wreath of smoke ascending marks the altar of each sage. Now a deeper shadow mantles bush and brake and trees around, And a thick and inky darkness falls upon the distant ground, Midnight prowlers of the jungle steal beneath the sable shade, But the tame deer by the altar seeks his wonted nighdy bed. Mark ! how by the stars encircled sails the radiant Lord of Night, With his train of silver glory streaming o'er the azure height, And thy consort waits thee, Sita, but before thou leavest, fair, Let me deck thy brow and bosom with these jewels rich and rare, t01d these eyes and grey these tresses, but a thrill of joy is mine, Thus to see thy youth and beauty in this gorgeous garment shine ! " 76 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Pleased at heart the ancient priestess clad her in apparel meet, And the young wife glad and grateful bowed to Anasuya's feet, Robed and jewelled, bright and beauteous, sweet-eyed Sita softly came. Where with anxious heart awaited Rama prince of righteous fame. With a wifely love and longing Sita met her hero bold, Anasuya's love and kindness in her grateful accents told, Rama and his brother listened of the grace by Sita gained, Favours of the ancient priestess, pious blessings she had rained. In the rishi's peaceful asram Rama passed the sacred night, In the hushed and silent forest silvered by the moon's pale light, Daylight dawned, to deeper forests Rama went serene and proud, As the sun in mid-day splendour sinks within a bank of cloud ! T] BOOK V PANCHAVATI (On the Banks of the Godavari) 'HE wanderings of Rama in the Deccan, his meeting with Saint Agastya, and his residence on the banks of the Godavari river, are narrated in this Book. The reader has now left Northern India and crossed the Vindhya mountains ; and the scene of the present and succeeding five Books is laid in the Deccan and Southern India. The name of Agastya is connected with the Deccan, and many are the legends told of this great Saint, before whom the Vindhya mountains bent in awe, and by whose might the Southern ocean was drained. It is likely that some religious teacher of that name first penetrated beyond the Vindhyas, and founded the first Aryan settlement in the Deccan, three thousand years ago. He was pioneer, discoverer and settler, — the Indian Columbus who opened out Southern India to Aryan colonization and Aryan religion. Two yojanas from Agastya* s hermitage, Rama built his forest dwelling in the woods of Panchavati, near the sources of the Godavari river, and within a hundred miles from the modern city of Bombay. There he lived with his wife and brother in peace and piety, and the Book closes with the description of an Indian winter morning, when the brothers and Sita went for their ablutions to the Godavari, and thought of their distant home in Oudh. The description of the peaceful forest-life of the exiles comes in most appropriately on the eve of stirring events which immediately succeed, and which give a new turn to the story of the Epic. We now stand therefore at the turning point of the poet's narrative ; 78 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA he has sung of domestic incidents and of peaceful hermitages so far ; he sings of dissensions and wars hereafter. The portions translated in this Book form Sections i., xii., xiii., xv., and xvi. of Book iii. of the original text. I The Hermitage of Agastya Righteous Rama, soft-eyed Sita, and the gallant Lakshman stood In the wilderness of Dandak, — trackless, pathless, boundless wood, But within its gloomy gorges, dark and deep and known to few. Humble homes of hermit sages rose before the princes' view. Coats of bark and scattered kusa spake their peaceful pure abode, Seat of pious rite and penance which with holy splendour glowed, Forest songsters knew the asram and the wild deer cropt its blade, And the sweet- voiced sylvan wood-nymph haunted oft its holy shade, Brightly blazed the sacred altar, vase and ladle stood around, Fruit and blossom, skin and faggot, sanctified the holy ground. From the broad and bending branches ripening fruits in clusters hung, And with gifts and rich libations hermits raised the ancient song, Lotus and the virgin lily danced upon the rippling rill, And the golden sunlight glittered on the greenwoods calm and still, And the consecrated woodland by the holy hermits trod, Shone like Brahma's sky in lustre, hallowed by the grace of God ! Rama loosened there his bow-string and the peaceful scene surveyed, And the holy sages welcomed wanderers in the forest shade, Rama bright as Lord of Midnight, Sita with her saintly face, Lakshman young and true and valiant, decked with warrior's peer- less grace ! ON THE BANKS OF THE GODAVARI 79 Leafy hut the holy sages to the royal guests assigned, Brought them fruit and forest blossoms, blessed them with their bles* sings kind, ** Raghu's son," thus spake the sages, " helper of each holy rite, Portion of the royal Indra, fount of justice and of might, On thy throne or in the forest, king of nations, lord of men, Grant to us thy kind protection in this hermit's lonely den ! " Homely fare and jungle produce were before the princes laid, And the toil-worn, tender Sita slumbered in the asram's shade. Thus from grove to grove they wandered, to each haunt of holy sage, Sarabhanga's sacred dwelling and Sutikshna's hermitage, Till they met the Saint Agastya, mightiest Saint of olden time, Harbinger of holy culture in the wilds of Southern clime ! " Eldest born of Dasa-ratha, long and far hath Rama strayed," — Thus to pupil of Agastya young and gallant Lakshman said, — " With his faithful consort Sita in these wilds he wanders still, I am righteous Rama's younger, duteous to his royal will, And we pass these years of exile to our father's mandate true, Fain to mighty Saint Agastya we would render homage due ! " Listening to his words the hermit sought the shrine of Sacred Fire, Spake the message of the princes to the Saint and ancient Sire : " Righteous Rama, valiant Lakshman, saintly Sita seek this shade, And to see thee, radiant ritbi, have in humble accents prayed." " Hath he come," so spake Agastya, "Rama prince of Raghu's race, Youth for whom this heart hath thirsted, youth endued with righteous grace, Hath he come with wife and brother
