to accept our greetings kind, Wherefore came ye for permission, wherefore linger they behind ? " «b THE EPIC *>F fc'AMk, PRIW€£ OF INDIA Rama and the soft-eyed* Ska were with gallant Larkshrhan led, Where 'the lduh deer free and fearless roamed within the hoiyuhacfc, Where the shrines of great Immortals stood in order thick and close, And by bright and blazing altars chanted songs and hymns arose. Brahma and the flaming Agni, Vishnu lord of heavenly light, Indra and 'benign ViVAsahr ruler of the azure ! height, Soma and the radiant Bhaga, and Kuvera lord of gold, And Vidhatri great Creator Worshiped by'thesaints of t>ld, Vayu breath of living creatures, Yama monarch of the dead, And Varuna with his fetters Which the trembling sinners dread, Holy Spirit of Gayatri goddess of the morning prayer, Vasus and the hooded Nagas, golden- winged Garuda fair, Kartikeya heavenly leader strong to conquer and to bless, DHARMA'god of human duty and of human righteousness, Shrines of all these bright Immortals ruling in the skies above, Filled the pure and peaceful forest with a tsdm and holy love! Girt by hermits righteous-hearted then the Saint Agastya came, Rich in wealth of pious penance, rich in learning and in fame, Mighty-arme*d Rama marked him radiant like the midday 'sun, Bowed and' rendered due obeisance with each act of homage done, Valiant Lakshman tall ahcl stately to the great Ajgastya bent, With a woman' 8 soft devotion Sita bowed unto the saint. Saint Agastya raised the princes, greeted them in accents sWeet, Gave them fruit and herb and water, offered them the honoured seat, With libations unto Agni offered welcome to each guest, Food and drink beseeming hermits on the wearied princes (pressed. "False the hermits," spake Agastya, "who to guests their dues deny, Hunger they in life hereafter— like * the speaker ^>f a -lie, <Wl -PHE BANKS OF "WJE -GGWAtfARl 81 And a royal igbest:4nd wanderer doth our foremost honour claim, Car-borttekittgs protect the wide'earth by their pro^eds^d their* fame, By these fruits and forest blossoms be our humble homage shewn, By some gift, of Rama worthy, be Agastya's blessings known ! Take this bow, heroic Rama,— need for warlike arms is thine, — Gems of more than earthly radiance on the goodly weapon shine, Worshipper of righteous Vishnu ! Vishnu's wondrous weapon take, Heavenly artist Viswa-karman shaped this bow of heavenly make ! Take this shining dart of Brahma radiant like a tongue of flame, Sped by good and worthy archer never shall it miss its aim, And this Indra's ample quiver filled with arrows true and keen, Filled with arrows still unfailing in the battle's dreadful scene ! Take this sabre golden-hiked in its case of burnished gold, Not unworthy of a monarch and a warrior true and bold, Impious foes of bright Immortals know these weapons dread and dire, Mowing down the ranks of foemen, scathing like the forest fire ! Be these weapons thy companions, — Rama, thou shdt need them oft, — Meet and conquer still thy foemen like the Thunder- God aloft / " II The Counsel 6f Agastya u Pleased am I," so spake Agastya, " in these forests dark and wild, Thou hast come to seek me, Rama, with the saintly Janak's child, But like pale and drooping blossom severed from the parent tree, Far from heme in toil and trouble, faithful Sita follows thee, 82 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA True to wedded lord and husband she hath followed Raghu's son, , With a woman9 8 deep devotion woman's duty she hath done ! How unlike the fickle woman, true while Fame and Fortune smile, Faithless when misfortunes gather, loveless in her wicked wile, How unlike the changeful woman, false as light the lightnings fling, Keen as sabre, quick as tempest, swift as bird upon its wing ! Dead to Fortune's frown or favour, Sita still in truth abides, As the star of Arundhati in her mansion still resides, Rest thee with thy gentle consort, farther still she may not roam, Holier were this hermit's forest as the saintly Sita's home ! " " Great Agastya ! " answered Rama, " blessed is my banished life, For thy kindness to an exile and his friendless homeless wife, But in wilder, gloomier forests lonesome we must wander still, Where a deeper, darker shadow settles on the rock and rill." " Be it so," Agastya answered, " two short yqjans from this place, Wild is Panchavati'8 forest where unseen the wild deer race, Godavari's limpid waters through its gloomy gorges flow, Fruit and root and luscious berries on its silent margin grow, Seek that spot and with thy brother build a lonesome leafy home, Tend thy true and toil-worn Sita, farther still she may not roam ! Not unknown to me the mandate by thy royal father given, Not unseen thy endless wanderings destined by the will of Heaven, Therefore Panchavati's forest marked I for thy woodland stay, Where the ripening wild fruit clusters and the wild bird trills his lay, Tend thy dear devoted Sita and protect each pious rite, Matchless in thy warlike weapons peerless in thy princely might ! Mark yon gloomy Mahua forest stretching o'er the boundless lea, Pass that wood and turning northward seek an old Nyagrodba tree, ON THE BANKS OF THE GODAVARI 83 Then ascend a sloping upland by a steep and lofty hill, Thou shalt enter Panchavati, blossom-covered, calm and still ! " Bowing to the great Agastya, Rama left the mighty sage, Bowing to each saint and hermit, Lakshman left the hermitage, And the princes tall and stately marched where Panchavati lay, Soft-eyed Sita followed meekly where her Rama led the way ! Ill The Forest of Panchavati Godavari'8 limpid waters in her gloomy gorges strayed, Unseen rangers of the jungle nestled in the darksome shade ! " Mark the woodlands," uttered Rama, " by the Saint Agastya told, Panchavati9 8 lonesome forest with its blossoms red and gold, Skilled to scan the wood and jungle, Lakshman, cast thy eye around, For our humble home and dwelling seek a low and level ground, Where the river laves its margin with a soft and gentle kiss, \ Where my sweet and soft-eyed Sita may repose in sylvan bliss, t Where the lawn is fresh and verdant and the kusa young and bright, £ And the creeper yields her blossoms for our sacrificial rite." " Little can I help thee, brother," did the duteous Lakshman say, " Thou art prompt to judge and fathom, Lakshman listens to obey ! " " Mark this spot," so answered Rama, leading Lakshman by the hand, " Soft the lawn of verdant kusa, beauteous blossoms light the land, Mark the smiling lake of lotus gleaming with a radiance fair, Wafting fresh and gentle fragrance o'er the rich and laden air, Mark each scented shrub and creeper bending o'er the lucid wave, Where the bank with soft caresses Godavari's waters lave ! 8* THE EPIC OF RAMft* PRING5 Qfi INItfA Tuneful ducks frequent this margin, Cbulravakm breathe of love, And the timid deer of jungle browse within the shady grove, And the valleys are resonant with the peacock's clarion cry, And the trees with budding blossoms glitter on the mountains high, And the rocks in well-marked strata in their glittering lines appear, Like the streaks of white and crimson painted on our tuskers fair! Stately Sal and feathered palm-tree guard this darksome forest-land, Golden date and flowering mango stretch afar on either hand, Asok thrives and blazing Kinsuk, Chandan wafts a fragrance rare, Asiva-karna and Khadira by the Sam dark and fair, Beauteous spot for hermit-dwelling joyous with the voice of song, Haunted by the timid wild deer and by black buck fleet and strong! " Foe-compelling faithful Lakshman heard the words his elder said, And by sturdy toil and labour stately home and dwelling made, Spacious was the leafy cottage walled with moistened earth and soft, Pillared with the stately, bamboo holding high the roof aloft, Interlacing twigs and branches, corded from the ridge to eaves,^ Held the thatch of reed and branches and of jungle grass and leaver And the floor was pressed and levelled and the toilsome task was dono, And the structure rose in beauty for th$ righteous Raghu's son ! To the river for ablutions Lakshman, went of warlike fame, With a store of fragrant lotus and of luscious berries came, Sacrificing to the Bright Gods sacred hymns and mantras said, Proudly then unto his elder shewed the home his hand had made. In her soft and grateful accents gentle Sita praised his skill, Praised a brother's loving labour, praised a hero's dauntless will, Rama clasped his faithful Lakshman in a brother's fond embrace, Spake in sweet and kindly accents with an elder's loving grace : <»ft Tftff ?£##& Off , TI*E GO^VA^ 8% " HowcaqjRaroajhpmcl^^f^rcr^pric^^ovplikptlji^ renujjte^ Let him. hold thee, in his bosom, sojil of, love, and ami of mighty And our father good and gracious, in, a righteous son like thee, Lives agajn and treads thehrig^eartl^, from, the bonds^of YAMA^ree ! " Thus spake Rama, and with Lakshman and with Sita child of love, 1 Dwelt in Panchavati's cottage as+ the Bright Gods dwell1 above !' I IV Winter in Panchav*ti, Came and passed the golden autumn in the forest's gloomy shade, And the. northern blasts of winter, swept along, tfefosjlpn^ gljtfjfc When the chilly night was over* once at morn the prince of 'fame For hi* mojnjng's, pure, .ablutions to the, Qodava^i carne^ Meek-eyed Sita softly followed with the. pitcher in hecarms* Gallant Lakshman spake to Rama of the Indian winter's charms : " Comes. the bright and bracing wjpter to the. royal Rama^deajy Like a bride the beauteous season doth in richest robes appear, Frosty ajf; and) freshening zephyrs, wake to life ejacht mart and plain^ And the corn in dewdrop sparkling makes a sea of waving green, But tfye village maid and matron shun tlje. freezing river's shore, By the fire the village elder tells the stirring tale of yore ! With the winter's ample harvest men perform each pious, rite, To the Fathers long departed, to the Gods of holy mighf, With the rite of agrayana pioufr men their, sins dispel* And with gay and sweet observance songs- of love the women tell; And the monarchsbent on, conquest mask the, winter;' Stcjoudleas glow* Lead their bannered cars. and. forces Against the, rival and t^e fpe,! South warfs rolls, the solar- chappy an4. % qo1o\ ajid w^flc-w^ Nop fc Reft of '.bridal mask ' an4 joyanc^ cojyiy, sighs, hex 8pr^ws^ipr$J^ 86 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Southward rolls the solar chariot, Himalaya, * home of snow/ True to name and appellation doth in whiter garments glow, Southward rolls the solar chariot, cold and crisp the frosty air, And the wood of flower dismantled doth in russet robes appear ! Star of Pushya rules December and the pight with rime is hoar, And beneath the starry welkin in the woods we sleep no more, And the pale moon mist-enshrouded sheds a faint and feeble beam, As the breath obscures the mirror, winter mist obscures her gleam, Hidden by the rising vapour faint she glistens on the dale, Like our sun-embrowned Sita with her toil and penance pale ! Sweeping blasts from western mountains through the gorges whistle by, And the saras and the curlew raise their shrill and piercing cry, Boundless fields of wheat and barley are with dewdrops moist and wet, And the golden rice of winter ripens like the clustering date, Peopled marts and rural hamlets wake to life and cheerful toil, And the peaceful happy nations prosper on their fertile soil ! Mark the sun in morning vapours — like the moon subdued and pale — Brightening as the day advances piercing through the darksome veil, Mark his gay and golden lustre sparkling o'er the dewy lea, Mantling hill and field and forest, painting bush and leaf and tree, Mark it glisten on the green grass, on each bright and bending blade, Lighten up the long drawn vista, shooting through the gloomy glade ! Thirst-impelled the lordly tusker still avoids the freezing drink, Wild duck and the tuneful hansa doubtful watch the river's brink, From the rivers wrapped in vapour unseen cries the wild curlew, Unseen rolls the misty streamlet o'er its sandbank soaked in dew, And the drooping water-lily bends her head beneath the frost, Lost her fresh and fragrant beauty and her tender petals lost ! ON THE BANKS OF THE GODAVARI 87 Now my errant fancy wanders to Ayodhya's distant town, Where in hermit's barks and tresses Bharat wears the royal crown, Scorning regal state and splendour, spurning pleasures loved of yore, Spends his winter day in penance, sleeps at night upon the floor, Aye 1 perchance Sarayu's waters seeks he now, serene and brave, As we seek, when dawns the daylight, Godavari's limpid wave ! Rich of hue, with eye of lotus, truthful, faithful, strong of mind, For the love he bears thee, Rama, spurns each joy of baser kind, ' False he proves unto his father who is led by mother's wile,' — Vain this ancient impious adage — Bharat spurns his mother's guile, Bharat's mother Queen Kaikeyi, Dasa-ratha's royal spouse, Deep in craft, hath brought disaster on Ayodhya s royal house ! " Speak not thus," so Rama answered, "on Kaikeyi cast no blame,/ Honour still the righteous Bharat, honour still the royal dame, Fixed in purpose and unchanging still in jungle wilds I roam, But thy accents, gentle Lakshman, wake a longing for my home ! And my loving mem'ry lingers on each word from Bharat fell, Sweeter than the draught of nectar, purer than the crystal well, And my righteous purpose falters, shaken by a brother's love, May we meet again our brother, if it please the Gods above ! " Waked by love, a silent tear-drop fell on Godavari's wave, True once more to righteous purpose Rama's heart was calm and brave, Rama plunged into the river 'neath the morning's crimson beam, Sita softly sought the waters as the lily seeks the stream, And they prayed to Gods and Fathers with each rite and duty done, And they sang the ancient mantra to the red and rising Sun, With her lord, in loosened tresses Sita to her cottage came, As with Rudra wanders Uma in Kailasa's hill of fame ! BOOK VI SITA-JftARAHA, (SifaLost) W1 ^E exchange the quiet life of Rama in holy hermitages for the more stirring incidents of the Epic in this.
