Haste thee, heedless Queen Kaikeyi, save the younger and thy son ! Speak thy mandate to thy husband, let thy Bharat rule at home, In the deep and pathless jungle let the banished Rama roam, 28 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA This will please thy ancient father and thy father's kith and kin, This will please the righteous people, Bharat knows no guile or sin ! Speak thy mandate to thy husband, win thy son a happy fate, Doom him not to Rama s sendee or his unrelenting hate, Let not Rama in his rancour shed a younger brother's blood, As the lion slays the tiger in the deep and echoing wood ! With the magic of thy beauty thou hast won thy monarch's heart, Queen Kausalya's bosom rankles with a woman's secret smart, Let her not with woman's vengeance turn upon her prouder foe, And as crowned Rama's mother venge her in Kaikeyi's woe, Mark my word, my child Kaikeyi, much these ancient eyes have seen, Rama's rule is death to Bharat, insult to my honoured queen ! " Like a slow but deadly poison worked the ancient nurse's tears, And a wife's undying impulse mingled with a mother's fears, Deep within Kaikeyi's bosom worked a woman's jealous thought, Speechless in her scorn and anger mourner's dark retreat she sought. V The Queen's Demand Rama shall be crowned at sunrise, so did royal bards proclaim, Every rite arranged and ordered, Dasa-ratha homeward came, To the fairest of his consorts, dearest to his ancient heart, Came the king with eager gladness joyful message to impart, Radiant as the Lord of Midnight, ere the eclipse casts its gloom, Came the old and ardent monarch heedless of his darksome doom ! THE BANISHMENT 29 Through the shady palace garden where the peacock wandered free, Lute and lyre poured forth their music, parrot flew from tree to tree, Through the corridor of creepers, painted rooms by artists done, And the halls where scented Ghampak and the flaming Asol shone, Through the portico of splendour graced by silver, tusk and gold, Radiant with his thought of gladness walked the monarch proud and bold. Through the lines of scented blossoms which by limpid waters shone, And the rooms with seats of silver, ivory bench and golden throne, Through the chamber of confection, where each viand wooed the taste, Every object in profusion as in regions of the blest, through Kaikeyi' s inner closet lighted with a softened sheen, Walked the king with eager longing, — but Kaikeyi was not seen ! \ Thoughts of love and gentle dalliance woke within his ancient heart, And the magic of her beauty and the glamour of her art, With a soft desire the monarch vainly searched the vanished fair, Found her not in royal chamber, found her not in gay parterre ! Filled with love and longing languor loitered not the radiant queen, In her soft voluptuous chamber, in the garden, grove or green, And he asked the faithful warder of Kaikeyi loved and lost, She who served him with devotion and his wishes never crost, '/ Spake the warder in his terror that the queen with rage distraught, Weeping silent tears of anguish had the mourner's chamber sought ! Thither flew the stricken monarch ; on the bare and unswept ground, Trembling with tumultuous passion was the Queen Kaikeyi found, On the cold uncovered pavement sorrowing lay the weeping wife, Young wife of an ancient husband, dearer than his heart and life ! 3o THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Like a bright and blossoming creeper rudely severed from the earth, Like a fallen fair Apsara, beauteous nymph of heavenly birth. Like a female forest-ranger bleeding from the hunter's dart, Whom her mate the forest-monarch soothes with soft endearing art, Lay the queen in tears of anguish ! And with sweet and gentle word To the lotus-eyed lady softly spake her loving lord : ^Wherefore thus, my Queen and Empress, sorrow-laden is thy heart. Who with daring slight or insult seeks to cause thy bosom smart ? If some unknown ailment pains thee, evil spirit of the air, Skilled physicians wait upon thee, priests with incantations fair, If from human foe some insult, wipe thy tears and doom his fate, Rich reward or royal vengeance shall upon thy mandate wait ! Wilt thou doom to death the guiltless, free whom direst sins debase, Wilt thou lift the poor and lowly or the proud and great disgrace, Speak, and I and all my courtiers Queen Kaikeyi's hest obey, For thy might is boundless, Empress, limitless thy regal sway ! Rolls my chariot-wheel revolving from the sea to farthest sea, And the wide earth is my empire, monarchs list my proud decree, Nations of the eastern regions and of Sindhu's western wave, Brave Saurashtras and the races who the ocean's dangers brave, Vangas, Angas and Magadhas, warlike Matsyas of the west, Kasis and the southern races, brave Kosalas first and best, Nations of my world-wide empire, rich in corn and sheep and'kine, All shall serve my Queen Kaikeyi and their treasures all are thine, Speak, command thy king's obedience, and thy wrath will melt away, Like the melting snow of winter 'neath the sun's reviving ray ! " Blinded was the ancient husband as he lifted up her head, _^ Heedless oath and word he plighted that her wish should be obeyed, THE BANISHMENT 31 Scheming for a fetal purpose, inly then Kaikeyi smiled, And by sacred oath and promise bound the monarch love-beguiled : ^"Thou hast given, Dasa-ratha, troth and word and royal oath, Three and thirty Gods be witness, watchers of the righteous truth, Sun and Moon and Stars be witness, Sky and Day and sable Night, Rolling Worlds and this our wide Earth, and each dark and unseen wight, Witness Rangers of the forest, Household Gods that guard us both, Mortal beings and Immortal, — witness ye the monarch's oath, Ever faithful to his promise, ever truthful in his word, Dasa-ratha grants my prayer, Spirits and the Gods have heard ! Call to mind, O righteous monarch, days when in a bygone strife, Warring with thy foes immortal thou hadst almost lost thy life, With a woman's loving tendance poor Kaikeyi cured thy wound, Till from death and danger rescued, thou wert by a promise bound, Two rewards my husband offered, what my loving heart might seek, Long delayed their wished fulfilment, — now let poor Kaikeyi speak, And if royal deeds redeem not what thy royal lips did say, Victim to thy broken promise Queen Kaikeyi dies to-day 1 ^By these rites ordained for Rama, — such the news my menials bring, — Let my Bharat, and not Rama, be anointed Regent King, Wearing skins and matted tresses, in the cave or hermit's cell, Fourteen years in Dandai's forests let the elder Rama dwell, These are Queen Kaihey?s wishes, these are boons for which 1 pray, I would see my son anointed* Rama banished on this day I " ;a THE EPIC OP RAMA, PRINCE OP INDIA VI The King's Lament ** Is this torturing dream or madness, do my feeble senses fail, O'er my darkened mind and bosom doth a fainting fit prevail ? " So the stricken monarch pondered and in hushed and silent fear, Looked on her as on a tigress looks the dazed and stricken deer, Lying on the unswept pavement still he heaved the choking sigh, Like a wild and hissing serpent quelled by incantations high ! Sobs convulsive shook his bosom and his speech and accent failed, And a dark and deathlike faintness o'er his feeble soul prevailed, Stunned awhile remained the monarch, then in furious passion woke, And his eyeballs flamed with red fire, to the queen as thus he spoke : " Traitress to thy king and husband, fell destroyer of thy race, Wherefore seeks thy ruthless rancour Rama rich in righteous grace, Traitress to thy kith and kindred, Rama loves thee as thy own, Wherefore then with causeless vengeance as a mother hate thy son ? Have I courted thee, Kaikeyi, throned thee in my heart of truth, Nursed thee in my home and bosom like a snake of poisoned tooth, Have I courted thee, Kaikeyi, placed thee on Ayodhya's throne, That my Rama, loved of people, thou shouldst banish from his own ? Banish far my Queen Kausalya, Queen Sumitra saintly wife, Wrench from me my ancient empire, from my bosom wrench my life, But with brave and princely Rama never can his father Dart, Till his ancient life is ended, cold and still his beating heart ! ■ THB BANISHMENT 33 Sunless roll the world in darkness, rainless may the harvests thrive, But from righteous Rama severed^ never can his sire survive, Feeble is thy aged husband, few and brief on earth his day, Lend me, wife, a woman's kindness, as a consort be my stay ! Ask for Other boon, Kaikeyi, aught my sea-girt empire yields, Wealth or treasure, gem or jewel, castled town or smiling fields, Ask for other gift, Kaikeyi, and thy wishes shall be given, Stain me not with crime unholy in the eye of righteous Heaven ! " Coldly spake the Queen Kaikeyi : <*If thy royal heart repent, Break thy word and plighted promise, let thy royal faith be rent, Ever known for truth and virtue, speak to peers and monarchs all, When from near and distant regions they shall gather in thy hall, Speak if so it please thee, monarch, of thy evil-destined wife, How she loved with wife's devotion, how she served and saved thy life, How on plighted promise trusting for a humble boon she sighed, How a monarch broke his promise, how a cheated woman died ! " " Fair thy form," resumed the monarch, " beauty dwells upon thy face, Woman's winsome charms bedeck thee, and a woman's peerless grace, Wherefore then within thy bosom wakes this thought of cruel wile, And what dark and loathsome spirit stains thy heart with blackest guile? ^Ever since the day, {Caikeyi, when a gentle bride you came, By a wvfe's unfailing duty you have won a woman 8 fame, Wherefore now this cruel purpose hath a stainless heart defiled, Ruthless wish to send my Rama to the dark and pathless wild ?, Wherefore, darkly-scheming woman, on unrighteous purpose bent, Doth thy cruel causeless vengeance on my Rama seek a vent, • 34 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Wherefore seek by deeds unholy for thy son the throne to win, Throne which Bharat doth not covet, — blackened by his mother's sin ? v Shall I see my banished Rama mantled in the garb of woe, Reft of home and kin and empire to the pathless jungle go., Shall I see disasters sweeping o'er my empire dark and deep. As the forces of a foeman o'er a scattered army sweep ? Shall I hear assembled monarchs in their whispered voices say, Weak and foolish in his dotage, Dasa-ratha holds his sway, Shall I say to righteous elders when they blame my action done, That by woman's mandate driven I have banished thus my son ? Queen Kausalya, dear-loved woman! she who serves me as a slave, Soothes me Kke a tender sister, helps me like a consort brave, As a fond and loving mother tends me with a watchful care, As a daughter ever duteous doth obeisance sweet and fair, When my fond and fair Kausalya asks me of her banished son, How shall Dasa-ratha answer for the impious action done, How can husband, cold and cruel, break a wife's confiding heart, How can father, false and faithless, from his best and eldest part ? " Coldly spake the Queen Kaikeyi : " If thy royal heart repent, Break thy word and plighted promise, let thy royal faith be rent, Truth-abiding is our monarch, so I heard the people say, And his word is all inviolate, stainless virtue marks his sway, Let it now be known to nations, — righteous Dasa-ratha lied, And a trusting, cheated woman broke her loving heart and died ! " Darker grew the shades of midnight, coldly shone each distant star, Wilder in the monarch's bosom raged the struggle and the war : >J*. Starry midnight, robed in shadows ! give my wearied heart relief, ^Spread thy sable covering mantle o'er an impious monarch's grieT, THE BANISHMENT 35 Spread thy vast and inky darkness o'er a detd of nameless crime, Reign perennial o'er my sorrows heedless of the lapse of time. May a sinful monarch perish ere the dawning of the day, O'er a dark life sin-polluted, beam not morning's righteous ray ! " VII The Sentence ^Morning came and duteous Rama to the palace bent his way, For to make his salutation and his due obeisance pay, And he saw his aged father shorn of kingly pomp and pride, And he saw the Queen Kaikeyi sitting by her consort's side. Duteously the righteous Rama touched the ancient monarch's feet, Touched the feet of Queen Kaikeyi with a son's obeisance meet, " Rama ! " cried the feeble monarch, but the tear bedimmed his eye, Sorrow choked his failing utterance and his bosom heaved a sigh, Rama started in his terror at his father's grief or wrath, Like a traveller in the jungle crossed by serpent in his path ! Reft of sense appeared the monarch, crushed beneath a load of pain, Heaving oft a sigh of sorrow as his heart would break in twain, Like the ocean tempest-shaken, like the sun in eclipse pale, Like a crushed repenting rishi when his truth and virtue fail ! Breathless mused the anxious Rama, — what foul action hath he done, What strange anger fills his father, wherefore greets he not his son ? " Speak, my mother," uttered Rama, " what strange error on my part, Unremembered sin or folly fills with grief my father's heart, y Gracious unto me is father with a father's boundless grace, Wherefore clouds his altered visage, wherefore tears bedew his face? dby VjC 36 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA ! Doth a piercing painful ailment rack his limbs with cruel smart, Doth some secret silent anguish wring his torn and tortured heart, Bharat lives with brave Satrughna in thy father's realms afar, Hath some cloud of dark disaster crossed their bright auspicious star ? Duteously the royal consorts on the loving monarch wait, Hath some woe or dire misfortune dimmed the lustre of their fate, I would yield my life and fortune ere I wound
