honour to our race ! " Royal grace and kingly greetings marked the ancient monarch's word, Janak with a grateful pleasure Dasa-ratha's answer heard, And the Brahmans and preceptors joyously the midnight spent, And in converse pure and pleasant and in sacred sweet content. Righteous Rama gallant Lakshman piously their father greet, Duly make their deep obeisance, humbly touch his royal feet, And the night is filled with gladness for the king revered and old, Honoured by the saintly Janak, greeted by his children bold, On Mithila's tower and turret stars their silent vigils keep, When each sacred rite completed, Janak seeks his nightly sleep. The Preparation All his four heroic princes now with Dasa-ratha stayed In Mithila's ancient city, and their father's will obeyed, Thither came the bold Yudhajit prince of proud Kaikeya's line, On the day that Dasa-ratha made his gifts of gold and kine, And he met the ancient monarch, for his health and safety prayed, Made his bow and due obeisance and in gentle accents said : " List, O king ! my royal father, monarch of Kaikeya's race, Sends his kindly love and greetings with his blessings and his grace, THE BRIDAL OF SITA u And he asks if Dasa-ratha prospers in his wonted health, If his friends and fond relations live in happiness and wealth. Queen Kaikeyi is my sister, and to see her son I came, Bharat prince of peerless virtue, worthy of his father's fame, Aye, to see that youth of valour, by my royal father sent, To Ayodhya's ancient city with an anxious heart I went, In the city of Mithila, — thus did all thy subjects say, — With his sons and with his kinsmen Dasa-ratha makes his stay, Hence in haste I journeyed hither, travelling late and early dawn, For to do thee due obeisance and to greet my sister's son ! " Spake the young and proud Kaikeya, dear and duly-greeted guest, Dasa-ratha on his brother choicest gifts and honours pressed. Brightly dawned the happy morning, and Kosala's king of fame With his sons and wise Vasishtha to the sacred yajna came, Rama and his gallant brothers decked in gem and jewel bright, In th' auspicious hour of morning did the blest Kautuka rite, And beside their royal father piously the princes stood, And to fair Videha's monarch spake Vasishtha wise and good : " Dasa-ratha watts expectant with each proud and princely son, Waits upon the bounteous giver, for each holy rite is done, 'Twixt the giver and the taker sacred word is sacred deed, Seal with girt thy plighted promise, let the nuptial rites proceed ! " Thus the righteous-souled Vasishtha to Videha's monarch prayed, Janak versed in holy Vedas thus in courteous accents said : *' Wherefore waits the king expectant ? Free to him this royal dome, Since my kingdom is his empire and my palace is his home, And the maidens, flame-resplendent, done each fond Kautuka rite, Beaming in their bridal beauty tread the sacrificial site 1 12 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA I beside the lighted altar wait upon thy sacred hest, And auspicious is the moment, sage Vasishtha knows the rest, Let the peerless Dasa-ratha, proud Kosala's king of might, With his sons and honoured sages enter on the holy site, Let the righteous sage Vasishtha, sprung from Vedic saints of old, Celebrate the happy wedding ; be the sacred mantras told ! " VI The Wedding Sage Vasishtha skilled in duty placed Videha's honoured king, Viswa-mitra, Sata-nanda, all within the sacred ring, And he raised the holy altar as the ancient writs ordain, Decked and graced with scented garlands grateful unto gods and men, And he set the golden ladles, vases pierced by artists skilled, Holy censers fresh and fragrant, cups with sacred honey filled, Sanka bowls and shining salvers, arghya plates for honoured guest, Parched rice arranged in dishes, corn unhusked that filled the rest, And with careful hand Vasishtha grass around the altar flung, Offered gift to lighted Agni and the sacred mantra sung ! Softly came the sweet-eyed Sita, — bridal blush upon her brow, — Rama in his manly beauty came to take the sacred vow, Janak placed his beauteous daughter facing Dasa-ratha' s son, Spake with father's fond emotion and the holy rite was done : " This is Sita child of Janak, dearer unto him than Iife9 Henceforth sharer of thy virtue, he she9 prince , thy faithful wife, THE BRIDAL OF SITA 13 Of thy weal and woe partaker, be she thine in every land, Cherish her in joy and sorrow, clasp her hand within thy hand, As the shadow to the substance, to her lord is faithful wife, And my Sita best of women follows thee in death or life / " Tears bedew his ancient bosom, gods and men his wishes share, And he sprinkles holy water on the blest and wedded pair. Next he turned to Sita's sister, Urmila of beauty rare, And to Lakshman young and valiant spake in accents soft and fair : " Lakshman, dauntless in thy duty, loved of men and God* above, Take my dear devoted daughter, Urmila of stainless love, Lakshman, fearless in thy virtue, take thy true and faithful wife, Clasp her hand within thy fingers, be she thine in death or life I*9 To his brother's child Mandavi, Janak turned with father's love, Yielded her to righteous Bharat, prayed for blessings from above : " Bharat, take the fair Mandavi, be she thine in death or life, Clasp her hand within thy fingers as thy true and faithful wife / " Last of all was Sruta-kriti, fair in form and fair in face, And her gentle name was honoured for her acts of righteous grace, " Take her by the hand, Satrughna, be she thine in death or life, As the shadow to the substance, to her lord is faithful wife I " Then the princes held the maidens, hand embraced in loving hand, And Vasishtha spake the mantra, holiest priest in all the land, And as ancient rite ordaineth, and as sacred laws require, Stepped each bride and princely bridegroom round the altar's lighted fire, Round Videha's ancient monarch, round the holy risbis all, Lightly stepped the gentle maidens, proudly stepped the princes tall ! i4 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And a rain of flowers descended from the sky serene and fair, And a soft celestial music filled the fresh and fragrant air, Bright Gandharoas skilled in music waked the sweet celestial song, Fair Apsarat in their beauty on the green sward tripped along ! As the flowery rain descended and the music rose in pride, Thrice around the lighted altar every bridegroom led his bride, And the nuptial rites were ended, princes took their brides away, Janak followed with his courtiers, and the town was proud and gay ! VII Return to Ayodhya With his wedded sons and daughters and his guard in bright array, To the famed and fair Ayodhya, Dasa-ratha held his way, And they reached the ancient city decked with banners bright and brave, And the voice of drum and trumpet hailed the home-returning brave. Fragrant blossoms strewed the pathway, song of welcome filled the air, Joyous men and merry women issued forth in garments fair, And they lifted up their faces and they waved their hands on high, And they raised the voice of welcome as their righteous king drew nigh. Greeted by his loving subjects, welcomed by his priests of fame, Dasa-ratha with the princes to his happy city came, With the brides and stately princes in the town he held his way, Entered slow his lofty palace bright as peak of Himalay. Queen Kausalya blessed with virtue, Queen Kaikeyi in her pride, Queen Sumitra sweetly loving, greeted every happy bride, THE BRIDAL OF SITA 15 Soft-eyed Site noble-destined, Urmila of spotless fame, Mandavi and Sruta-kirti to their loving mothers came. Decked in silk and queenly garments they performed each pious rite, Brought their blessings on the household, bowed to Godp of holy might, Bowed to all the honoured elders, blest the children with their love, And with soft and sweet endearment by their loving consorts moved. Happy were the wedded princes peerless in their warlike might, And they dwelt in stately mansions like Kuvera's mansions bright, Loving wife and troops of kinsmen, wealth and glory on them wait, Filial love and fond affection sanctify their happy fate. Once when on the palace chambers bright the golden morning woke, To his son the gentle Bharat, thus the ancient monarch spoke : " Know, my son, the prince Kaikeya, Yudajit of warlike fame, Queen Kaikeyi's honoured brother, from his distant regions came, He hath come to take thee, Bharat, to Kaikeya's monarch bold, Go and stay with them a season, greet thy grandsire loved of old." Bharat heard with filial duty and he hastened to obey, Took with him the young Satrughna in his grandsire's home to stay, And from Rama and from Lakshman parted they with many a tear, From their young and gentle consorts, from their parents ever dear, And Kaikeya with the princes, with his guards and troopers gay, To his father's western regions gladsome held his onward way. Rama with a pious duty, — favoured by the Gods above, — Tended still his ancient father with a never-faltering love. In his father's sacred mandate still his noblest Duty saw, In the weal of subject nations recognised his foremost Law! And he pleased his happy mother with a fond and filial care, And his elders and his kinsmen with devotion soft and fair, 16 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Brahmans blessed the righteous Rama for his faith in gb4s above, People in the town and hamlet blessed him with their loyal love 1 Wkfc a woman's whole affection fond and trusting Sita loved, And within her faithful bosom loving Rama lived and moved, And he loved her, for their parents chose her as his faithful wife, Loved her for her peerless beauty, for her true and trustful life, Loved and dwelt within her bosom though he wore a form apart, Rama in a sweet communion lived in Site's loving heart ! Days of joy and months of gladness o'er the gentle Sita flew, As she like the Quebn of Beauty brighter in her graces grew, And as Vishnu with his consort dwells in skies, alone, apart, Rama in a sweet communion lived in Site's loving heart ! BOOK II VANA-GAMANA-ADESA {The Banishment) HP HE events narrated in this Book occupy scarcely two days. The description of Rama's princely virtues and the rejoicings at his proposed coronation, with which the Book begins, contrast with much dramatic force and effect with the dark intrigues which follow, and which end in his cruel banishment for fourteen years. The portions translated in this Book form Sections i., ii., vi., and vii., portions of Sections x. to xiii., and the whole of Section xviii. of Book ii. of the original text. The Council Convened Thus the young and brave Satrughna, Bharat ever true and bold, Went to warlike western regions where Kaikeyas lived of old, Where the ancient Aswa-pati ruled his kingdom broad and fair, Hailed the sons of Dasa-ratha with a grandsire's loving care. Tended with a fond affection, guarded with a gentle sway, Still the princes of their father dreamt and thought by night and day, And their father in Ayodhya, great of heart and stout of hand, Thought of Bharat and Satrughna living in Kaikeya's land. 18 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA For his great and gallant princes were to him his life and light, Were a part of Dasa-ratha like his hands and arms of might. But of all his righteous children righteous Rama won his heart, As Swayambhu of all creatures, was his dearest, holiest part, For his Rama strong and stately was his eldest and his best, Void of every baser passion and with every virtue blest ! Soft in speech, sedate and peaceful, seeking still the holy path, Calm in conscious worth and valour, taunt nor cavil waked his wrath, In the field of war excelling, boldest warrior midst the bold, In the palace chambers musing on the tales by elders told, Faithful to the wise and learned, truthful in his deed and word, Rama dearly loved his people and his people loved their lord ! To the Brahmans pure and holy Rama due obeisance made, To the poor and to the helpless deeper love and honour paid, Spirit of his race and nation was to high-souled Rama given, Thoughts that widen human glory, deeds that ope the gates of heaven ! Not intent on idle cavil Rama spake with purpose high, And the God of speech might envy when he spake or made reply, In the learning of the Vedas highest meed and glory won, In the skill of arms the father scarcely matched the gallant son ! Taught by sages and by elders in the manners of his race, Rama grew in social virtues and each soft endearing grace, Taught by inborn pride and wisdom patient purpose to conceal, Deep determined was his effort, dauntless was his silent will ! Peerless in his skill and valour steed and elephant to tame, Dauntless leader of his forces, matchless in his warlike fame, Higher thought and nobler duty did the righteous Rama move, By his toil and by his virtues still he sought his people's love ! THE BANISHMENT 19 Dasa-ratha marked his Rama with each kingly virtue blest, And from life-long royal duties now he sought repose and rest : " Shall I see my son anointed, seated on Kosala's throne, In the evening of my life-time ere my days on earth be done, Shall I place my ancient empire in the youthful Rama's care, Seek for me a higher duty and prepare for life more fair ? " Pondering thus within his bosom counsel from his courtiers sought, And to crown his Rama, Regent, was his purpose and his thought, For strange signs and diverse tokens now appeared on earth and sky, And his failing strength and vigour spoke his end approaching nigh, And he witnessed Rama's virtues filling all the world with love, As the full-moon's radiant lustre fills the earth from skies above ! Dear to him appeared his purpose, Rama to his people dear, Private wish and public duty made his path serene and clear, Dasa-ratha called his Council, summoned chiefs from town and plain, Welcomed too from distant regions monarchs and
