rain-besprinkled breeze, Fragrant with the ketak blossom, scented by the camphor trees, Fresh and bold each peak and mountain bathed in soft descending rain, So they sprinkle holy water when they bless a monarch's reign ! I Fair and tall as holy hermits, stand yon shadow-mantled hills, Murmuring mantras with the zephyr, robed in threads of sparkling rills, Fair and young as gallant coursers neighing forth their thunder cries, Lashed by golden whips of lightning are the dappled sunlit skies ! Ah, my lost and loving Sita ! writhing in a Raksha's power, As the lightning shakes and quivers in this dark tempestuous shower, Shadows thicken on the prospect, flower and leaf are wet with rain, And each passing object, Lakshman, wakes in me a thought of pain ! Joyously from throne and empire with my Sita I could part, As the stream erodes its margin, Ska's absence breaks my heart, Rain and tempest cloud the prospect as they cloud my onward path, Dubious is my darksome future, mighty is my fbeman's wrath ! Ravan monarch of the Rakshas, — so Jatayu said and died, — In some unknown forest fastness doth my sorrowing Sita hide, But Sugriva true and faithful seeks the Raksha's secret hold. Firm in faith and fixed in purpose we will face our foeman hold ! " IN THE NILGIRI MOUNTAINS 115 VI The Quest for Sita Past the rains, the marshalled Vanars gathered round Sugriva bold, And unto a gallant chieftain thus the king his purpose told : " Brave in war and wise in counsel ! take ten thousand of my best, Seek the hiding-place of Ravan in the regions of the East* Seek each ravine rock and forest and each shadowy hill and cave, Far where bright Sarayu's waters mix with Ganga's ruddy wave, And where Jumna's dark blue waters ceaseless roll in regal pride, And the Sone through leagues of country spreads its torrent far and wide. Seek where in Videha's empire castled towns and hamlets shine, In Kosala and in Malwa and by Kasi's sacred shrine, Magadh rich in peopled centres, Pundra region of the brave, Anga rich in corn and cattle on the eastern ocean wave. Seek where clans of skilful weavers dwell upon the eastern shore, And from virgin mines of silver miners work the sparkling ore, In the realms of uncouth nations, in the islets of the sea, In the mountains of the ocean, wander far and wander free ! " Next to Nila son of Agni, Jambaman Vidhata's son, Hanuman the son of Marut, famed for deeds of valour done, Unto Gaya and Gavaksha, Gandha-madan true and tried, Unto Angad prince and regent, thus the brave Sugriva cried : "Noblest, bravest of our chieftains, greatest of our race are ye, Seek and search the Southern regions, rock and ravine, wood and tree. ii6 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OP INDIA Search the thousand peaks of Vindhya lifting high its misty head, Through the gorges of Narmada rolling o'er its rocky bed, By the gloomy Godavari and by Krishna's wooded stream, Through Utkala's sea-girt forests tinged by morning's early gleam. Search the towns of famed Dasarna and Avanti's rocky shore, And the uplands of Vidarbha and the mountains of Mysore, Land of Matsyas and Kalingas and Kausika's regions fair, Trackless wilderness of Dandak seek with anxious toil and care. Search the empire of the Andhras, of the sister-nations three,— Cholas, Cheras and the Paadyas dwelling by the southern sea, Pass Kaveri's spreading waters, Malya's mountains towering brave, Seek the isle of Tamra-parni, gemmed upon the ocean wave ! " To Susena chief and elder, — Tara's noble sire was he, — Spake Sugriva with obeisance and in accents bold and free : " Take my lord, a countless army of the bravest and the best, Search where beats the sleepless ocean on the regions of the West. Search the country of Saurashtras, of Bahlikas strong and brave, And each busy mart and seaport on the western ocean wave, Castles girt by barren mountains, deserts by the sandy sea, Forests of the fragrant ketakj regions of the tamalttee ! Search the ocean port of Pattan shaded by its fruitful trees, Where the feathery groves of cocoa court the balmy western breeze, Where on peaks of Soma-giri lordly lions wander free, Where the waters of the Indus mingle with the mighty sea ! " Lastly to the valiant chieftain Satavala strong and brave, For the quest of saintly Sita thus his mighty mandate gave : IN THE NILGIRI MOUNTAINS 117 " Hie thee, gallant Satavala, with thy forces wander forth, To the peaks of Himalaya, to the regions of the North ! Mlechchas and the wild Pulindas in the rocky regions dwell, Madra chiefs and mighty Kurus live within each fertile vale, Wild Kambojas of the mountains, Yavanas of wondrous skill, Sakas swooping from their gorges, Pattanas of iron will ! Search the woods of devadtaru mantling Himalaya's side, And the forests of the lodhra spreading in their darksome pride, Search the land of Soma-srama where the gay Gandbarvas dwell, In the table land of Kala search each rock and ravine well ! Cross the snowy Himalaya, and Sudaran's holy peak,. Deva-sakha's wooded ranges which the feathered songsters seek, Cross the vast and dreary region void of stream Or wooded hill, Till you reach the white Kailasa, home of Gods, serene and Still ! Pass Kuvera's pleasant regions, search the Krauncfea mountain well, And the land where warlike females and the horse-faced women dwell Halt not till you reach the country where the Northern Iturus rest, Utmost confines of the wide earth, home of Gods and Spirits blest ! " BOOK VIII SITA-SANDESA (Sita Discovered) AMONG the many chiefs sent by Sugriva in different direc- *^^ tions in search of Ska, Hanuman succeeded in the quest and discovered Sita in Ceylon. Ceylon is separated from India by a broad channel of the sea, and Hanuman leaped, or rather flew through the air, across the channel, and lighted on the island. Sita, scorning the proposals of Ravan, was kept in confinement in a garden of Aioka trees, surrounded by a terrible guard of Raksha females ; and in this, hard confinement she remained true and faithful to her lord. Hanuman gave her a token from Rama, and carried back to Rama a token which she sent of her undying affec- tion and truth. The portions translated in this Book form the whole of the main portions of Sections xv., xxxi., xxxvi., and lxvi. of Book v. of the original text. I Sita in the Asoka Garden Crossed the ocean's boundless waters, Hanuman in duty brave, Lighted on the emerald island girdled by the sapphire wave, And in tireless quest of Sita searched the margin of the sea, In a dark Asoka garden hid himself within a tree. Creepers threw their clasping tendrils round the trees of ample height, Stately palm and feathered cocoa, fruit and blossom pleased the sight, SITA DISCOVERED 119 Herds of tame and gentle creatures in the grassy meadow strayed, Kokik tang in leafy thicket, birds of plumage lit the shade. Limpid lakes of scented lotus with their fragrance filled the air, Homes and huts of rustic beauty peeped through bushes green and fair, Blossoms rich in tint and fragrance in the checkered shadow gleamed, Clustering fruits of golden beauty in the yellow sunlight beamed ! Brightly shone the red Asoha with the morning's golden ray, Karntkara and Kinsuka dazzling as the light of day, Brightly grew the flower of Champak in the vale and on the reef, Punnaga and Saptaparna with its seven-fold scented leaf, Rich in blossoms many tinted, grateful to the ravished eye, Gay and green and glorious Lanka was like garden of the sky, Rich in fruit and laden creeper and in beauteous bush and tree, Flower-bespangled golden Lanka was like gem-bespangled sea ! Rose a palace in the woodlands girt by pillars strong and high, Snowy-white like fair Kailasa cleaving through the azure sky, And its steps were ocean coral and its pavement yellow gold, White and gay and heaven- aspiring rose the structure high and bold ! By the rich and royal mansion Hanuman his eyes did rest, On a woman sad and sorrowing in her sylvan garments drest, Like the moon obscured and clouded, dim with shadows deep and dark, Like the smoke- enshrouded red fire, dying with a feeble spark, Like the tempest-pelted lotus by the wind and torrent shaken, Like the beauteous star Rohini by a graha overtaken ! Fasts and vigils paled her beauty, tears bedimmed her tender grace, Anguish dwelt within her bosom, sorrow darkened on her face, 120 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And the lived by Rakshas guarded, as a fata and timid deer, Severed from her herd and kindred when the prowling wolves are near, And her raven lockt ungathered hang behind in single braid, And her gentle eye was lightless, and her brow was hid in shade! " This is she! the peerless princess, Rama's consort loved and lost, This is she ! the saintly Sita, by a cruel fortune crost," Hanuman thus thought and pondered : " On her graceful form I spy, Gems and gold by sorrowing Rama oft depicted with a sigh, On her ears the golden pendants and the tiger's sharpened tooth, On her arms the jewelled bracelets, tokens of unchanging truth, On her pallid brow and bosom still the radiant jewels shine, Rama with a sweet affection did in early days entwine ! Hermit's garments clothe her person, braided is her raven hair, Matted bark of trees of forest drape her neck and bosom fair, And a dower of dazzling beauty still bedecks her peerless face, Though the shadowing tinge of sorrow darkens all her earlier grace! This is she ! the soft-eyed Sita, wept with unavailing tear, This is she ! the faithful consort, unto Rama ever dear, Unforgetting and unchanging, truthful still in deed and word, Sita in her silent suffering sorrows for her absent lord, Still for Rama lost but cherished, Sita heaves the choking sigh, Sita lives for righteous Rama, for her Rama she would die ! " SITA DISCOVERED 121 II The Voice of Hope Hanuman from leafy shelter lifts his voice in sacted song, Till the tale of Rama's glory Lanka's woods and vales prolong : " Listen, Lady, to my story ; — >Dasa-ratha famed in war, Rich in steeds and royal tuskers, arme'd men and battle car, Ruled his realm in truth and virtue, in his bounty ever free, Of the mighty race of Raghu mightiest king and monarch he, Robed in every royal virtue, great in peace in battle brave, Blest in bliss of grateful nations, blest in blessings which he gave ! And his eldest-born and dearest, Rama soul of righteous might, Shone, as mid the stars resplendent shines the radiant Lord of Night, True unto his sacred duty, true unto his kith and kin, Friend of piety and virtue, punisher of crime and sin, Loved in all his spacious empire, peopled mart and hermit's den, With a truer deeper kindness Rama loved his subject men ! Dasa-raiha, promise-fettered, then his cruel mandate gave, Rama with his wife and brother lived in woods and rocky cave, And he slaved the deer of jungle and he slept in leafy shade, Stern destroyer of the Rakshas in the pathless forests strayed, Till the monarch of the Rakshas, — fraudful is his impious life, — Cheated Rama in the jungle, from his cottage stole his wife ! Long lamenting lone and weary Rama wandered in the wood, Searched for Sita in the jungle where his humble cottage stood, Godavari's gloomy gorges, Krishna's dark and wooded shore, And the ravine, rock and valley, and the cloud-capped mountain hoar! i«4 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " Trust me, Lady, valiant Rama soon will greet his saintly wife, E'en as Indra greets his goddess, Sachi dearer than his life, Trust me, Sita, conquering Rama comes wj|h panoply of wax, Shaking Lanka's sea-girt mountains, slaying Rakshia near aad fail He shall cross the boundless ocean with the battle's dread array, He shall smite the impious Ravan aad the cruel Rakahas slay, Mighty Gods and strong Asutas shall not hinder Rama's path, When at Lanka's gates be thunders with his more than godlike wrath, Deadly Yama, all -destroying, pales before his peerless might, When his red right arm of vengeance wrathful Rama lifts to smite! By the lofty Mandar mountains, by the fruit and root I seek, By the cloud- obstructing Vindhyas, and by Malya's towering peak, I will swear, my gentle Lady, Rama's vengeance draweth nigh, Thou shalt see his beaming visage like the Lord of Midnight Sky, Firm in purpose Rama waiteih on the Prasra-vana hill, As upon the huge Airayat, Indra, motionless and still ! Flesh of deer nor forest honey tasteth Rama true and bold. Till he rescues cherished Sita from the Rakshas castled hold, Thoughts of Sita leave mot Rama dreary day or darksome night, Till his vengeance deep and dreadful crushes Ravan in his mighty Forest flower nor seented creeper pleases Ramaxs anguished heart. Till he wins his wedded consort by bis death-compelling dart 1 " SITA DISCOVERED 125 IV Situ* Takes Token from her raven tresses Sita to the Vanar gave, Hanuman with dauntless valour crossed once more the ocea* ware, Where in Prasra-vana's mountain Rama with his brother stayed, Jewel from the brow of Sita by her sorrowing consort laid, Spake of Ravan's foul endearment and his loathsome loving word, Spake of Sita's scorn and anger and her truth unto her lord, Tears of sorrow and affection from the warrior's eyelids start, As his consort's loving token Rama presses to his heart ! " As the mother-cow, Sugriva, yields her milk beside her young, Welling tears upon this token yields my heart by anguish wrung, Well I know this dear- loved jewel sparkling with the ray of heaven, Born in sea, by mighty Indra to my Sfta's father given, Well I know this tender token* Janak placed it on her bair, When she came my bride and consort decked in beauty rich and rare, Well I know this sweet memorial, Sita wore it on her head, And her proud and peerless beauty on the gem a lustre shed ! Ah, methinks the gracious Janak stands again before my eye, With a father's fond affection, with a monarch's stature high, Ah, methinks my bride and consort, she who wore it on her brow, Stands again before the altar speaks again
