each weeping dame, And to sorrowing Queen Sumitra with his due obeisance came, And he bowed to Queen Sumitra and his mother kissed his head, Stilled her anguish-laden bosom and in trembling accents said : " Dear devoted duteous Lakshman, ever to thy elder true, When thy elder wends to forest, forest-life to thee is due, Thou hast served him true and faithful in his glory and his fame, This is Law for true and righteous* — serve him in his woe and shame, This is Law for race of Raghu known on earth for holy might, Bounteous in their sacred duty, brave and warlike in the fight I Therefore tend him as thy father, as thy mother tend his wife, And to thee, like fair Ayodhya be thy humble forest life, Go, my son, the voice of Duty bids my gallant Lakshman go, Serve thy elder with devotion and with valour meeTTnYWpltf' IV Citizens1 Lament Spake Sumantra chariot-driver waiting by the royal car, " Haste thee, mighty-destined Rama, for we wander long and far, Fourteen years in Dandak's forest shall the righteous Rama stray, Such is Dasa-ratha's mandate, haste thee Rama and obey." THE DEATH OF THE KING 47 Queenly Sita bright-apparelled, with a ttrong and trusting heart, d, Counted on the car of splendour for the pathless woods to part, roAnd the king for needs providing gave her robes and precious store, .7or the many years of exile in a far and unknown shore, &nd a wealth of warlike weapons to the exiled princes gave, ,Bow and dart and linked armour, sword and shield and lances brave. Then the gallant brothers mounted on the gold-emblazoned car, For unending was the journey and the wilderness was far, Skilled Sumantra saw them seated, urged the swiftly-flying steed, Faster than the speed of tempest was the noble coursers' speed. And they parted for the forest ; like a long unending night, Gloomy shades of grief and sadness deepened on the city's might, Mute and dumb but conscious creatures felt the woe the city bore, Horses neighed and shook their bright bells, elephants returned a roar ! Man and boy and maid and matron followed Rama with their eye, As the thirsty seek the water when the parched fields are dry, Clinging to the rapid chariot, by its side, before, behind, Thronging men and wailing women wept for Rama good and kind : u Draw the reins, benign Sumantra, slowly drive the royal car, We would once more see our Rama banished long and banished far, Iron-hearted is Kausalya from her Rama thus to part, Rends it not her mother's bosom thus to see her son depart ? True is rightecus-hearted Sita cleaving to her husband still, As the ever present sunlight cleaves to Meru's golden hill, Faithful and heroic Lakshman ! thou hast by thy brother stood, And in duty still unchanging thou hast sought the pathless wood, Fixed in purpose, true in valour, mighty boon to thee is given, And the narrow path thou choosest is the righteous path to heaven ! " 48 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Thus they spake in tears and anguish as they followed him apace, And their eyes were fixed on Rama, pride of Raghu's royal race, Meanwhile ancient Dasa-ratha from his palace chamber' came, With each weeping queen and consort, with each woe-disfracted dame! And around the aged monarch rose the piercing voice of pain, Like the wail of forest creatures when the forest-king is slain, And the faint and feeble monarch was with age and anguish pale, Like the darkened moon at eclipse when his light and radiance fail ! Rama saw his ancient father with a faltering footstep go, Used to royal pomp and splendour, stricken now by age and woe, Saw his mother faint and feeble to the speeding chariot hie, As the mother-cow returneth to her young that loiters by, Still she hastened to the chariot, " Rama ! Rama ! " was her cry, And a throb was in her bosom and a tear was in her eye ! " Speed, Sumantra," uttered.- Rama, " from this torture let me part, Speed, my friend, this sight of sadness breaks a much-enduring heart, j Heed not Dasa-ratha' s mandate, stop not for the royal train, Parting slow is lengthened sorrow like the sinner's lengthened pain ! " Sad Sumantra urged the coursers and the rapid chariot flew, And the royal chiefs and courtiers round their fainting monarch drew, And they spake to Dasa-ratha : " Follow not thy banished son, He whom thou wouldst keep beside thee comes not till his task is done!" Dasa-ratha, faint and feeble, listened to these words of pain, Stood and saw his son departing, — saw him not on earth again ! THE DgATH OW THE KING 49 Crossing the Tamasa: the Citizens' Return Evening's thickening shades descended on Tamasa's distant shore, Rama rested by the river, day of toilsome journey o'er, And Ayodhya's loving people by the limpid river lay, Sad and sorrowing they had followed Rama's chariot through the day ! " Soft-eyed Sita, faithful Lakshman," thus the gentle Rama said, " Hail the first night of our exile mantling us in welcome shade, Weeps the lone and voiceless forest, and in darksome lair and nest Feathered bird and forest creature seek their midnight's wonted rest Weeps methinks our fair Ayodhya to her Rama ever dear, And perchance her men and women shed for us a silent tear, Loyal men and faithful women, they have loved their ancient king, And his anguish and our exile will their gentle bosoms wring ! Moat I sorrow for my father and my mother loved and lost, Stricken by untimely anguish, by a cruel fortune crost, Bat the good and righteous JJharat gently will my parents tend, . And with fond and filial duty tender consolation lend, Well I know his stainless bosom and his virtues rare and high, He will soothe our parents' sorrow arid their trickling tear will dry ! Faithful Lakshman, thou hast nobly stood by us when sorrows fell, Guard my Sita by thy valour, by thy virtues tend her well, Wait on her while from this river Rama seeks his thirst to slake, On this first night of his exile food nor fruit shall Rama take, Thpu Sumantra, tend the horses, darkness comes with. close of day, Weary was the endless journey, weary is our onward way !." 50 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Store of grass and welcome fodder to the steeds the driver gave, Gave them rest and gave them water from Tamasa's limpid wave, And performing night's devotions, for the princes made their bed, By the softly rippling river 'neath the tree's umbrageous shade. On a bed of leaf and verdure Rama and his Sita slept, Faithful Lakshman with Sumantra nightly watch and vigils kept, And the stars their silent lustre on the weary exiles shed, Ajid on wood and rolling river night her darksome mantle spread. Early woke the righteous Rama and to watchful Lakshman spake : " Mark the slumb'ring city people, still their nightly rest they take, They have left their homes and children, followed us with loyal heart, They would take us to Ayodhya, from their princes loth to part ! Speed, my brother, for the people wake not till the morning's star, Speed by night the silent chariot, we may travel fast and far, So my true and loving people see us not by dawn of day, Follow not through wood and jungle Rama in his onward way, For a monarch meek in suffering should his burden bravely bear, And his true and faithful people may not ask his woe to share 1 " Lakshman heard the gentle mandate, and Sumantra yoked the steed, Fresh with rest and grateful fodder, matchless in their wondrous speed, Rama with his gentle, consort and, with Lakshman true and brave, Crossed beneath the silent starlight dark Tamasa's limpid wave. On the further bank a pathway, fair to view and far and wide. Stretching onwards to the forests spanned the spacious country side, " Leave the broad and open pathway," so the gentle Rama said, " Follow yet a track diverging, so the people be misled} THE DEATH OF THE KING 51 Then returning to the pathway we shall march ere break of day. So our true and faithful people shall not know our southward way." Wise Sumantra hastened northward, then returning to the road, By his master and his consort and the valiant Lakshman stood, Raghu'8 sons and gentle Sita mounted on the stately car, • And Sumantra drove the coursers travelling fast and travelling far. Morning dawned, the waking people by Tamasa's limpid wave, Saw not Rama and his consort, saw not Lakshman young and brave, And the tear suffused their feces and their hearts with anguish burned, Sorrow-laden and lamenting to their cheerless homes returned. VI Crossing the Ganges. Bharad-vaja's Hermitage Morning dawned, and far they wandered, by their people loved and lost, Drove through grove and flowering woodland, rippling rill and river crost, Crossed the sacred Vedasruti on their still unending way, Crossed the deep and rapid Gumti where the herds of cattle stray, All the toilsome day they travelled, evening fell o'er wood and lea, And they came where sea- like Ganga rolls in regal majesty, 'Neath a tall Ingudi's shadow by the river's zephyrs blest, Second night of Rama's exile passed in sleep and gentle rest. Morning dawned, the royal chariot Rama would no further own, Sent Sumantra and the coursers back to fair Ayodhya's town, Doffing then their royal garments Rama and his brother bold Coats of bark and matted tresses wore like anchorites of old. Guha, chief of wild Nishadas, boat and needed succour gave, And the princes and fair Sita ventured on the sacred wave, 52 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And by royal Rama bidden strong Nishdas plied the oar, And the strong boat quickly bounding left fair Ganga' s northern shore. " Goddess of the mighty Ganga ! " so the pious Sita prayed, " Exiled by his father's mandate, Rama seeks the forest shade, Ganga ! o'er the three worlds rolling, bride and empress of the sea, And from Brahma's sphere descended ! banished Sita bows to thee, May my lord return in safety, and a thousand fattened kine, Gold and gifts and gorgeous garments, pure libations shall be thine, And with flesh and corn I worship unseen dwellers on thy shore, May my lord return in safety, fourteen years of exile o'er ! " On the southern shore they journeyed through the long and weary day, Still through grove and flowering woodland held their long and weary way, And they slayed the deer of jungle and they spread their rich repast, Third night of the princes' exile underneath a tree was past. Morning dawned, the soft-eyed Sita wandered with the princes brave, To the spot where ruddy Ganga mingles with dark Jumna's wave, And they crost the shady woodland, verdant lawn and grassy mead, Till the sun was in its zenith, Rama then to Lakshman said : " Yonder mark the famed Prayaga, spot revered from age. to age, And the line of smoke ascending speaks some rishi's hermitage, There the waves of ruddy Ganga with the dark blue Jumna meet, And my ear the sea-like voices of the mingling waters greet. Mark the monarchs of the forest severed by the hermit's might, And the logs o£ wood and fuel for the sacrificial rite, Mark the tall trees in their blossom and the peaceful shady grove, There the sages make their dwelling, thither, Lakshman, let us rove." THE DEATH OF THE KING. 53 Slowly came the exile- wand'rers, when the sua withdrew his rays, Where the vast and sea-like rivers met in sisters' sweet embrace, And the asram s peaceful dwellers, bird of song and spotted deer, Quaked to see the princely strangers in their warlike garb appear J Rama stepped with valiant Lakshman, gentle Ska followed close, Till behind the screening foliage hermits' peaceful dwellings rose, And they came to Bharad-vaja, anchorite and holy saint, Girt by true and faithful pupils on his sacred duty bent. Famed for rites and lofty penance was the anchorite of yore, Blest with more than mortal vision, deep in more than mortal lore, And he sat beside the altar for the agni-hotra rite, Rama spake in humble accents to the man of holy might : " We are sons of Dasa-ratha and to thee our homage bring, With my wife, the saintly Sita, daughter of Videha's king, Exiled by my royal father in the wilderness I roam, And my wife and faithful brother make the pathless woods their home, We would through these years of exile in some holy asram dwell, And our food shall be the wild fruit and our drink from crystal well, We would practise pious penance still on sacred rites intent, Till our souls be filled with wisdom and qur years of exile spent ! " Pleased the ancient Bharad-vaja heard the prince's humble tale, And with kind and courteous welcome royal strangers greeted well, And he brought the milk and argbya where the guests observant stood, Crystal water from the fountain, berries from the darksome wood, And a low and leafy cottage for their dwelling-place assigned, As a host receives a stranger, welcomed them with offerings kind. In the asram s peaceful courtyard fearless browsed the jungle deer, All unharmed the bird of forest pecked the grain collected near, 54 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And by holy men surrounded 'neath the trees' umbrageous shade, In his pure and peaceful accents riM Bharad-vaja said : " Not unknown or unexpected, princely strangers, have ye come, I have heard of sinless Kama's causeless banishment from home, Welcome to a hermit's forest, be this spot your place of rest, Where the meeting of the rivers makes our sacred asram blest, Lire amidst these peaceful woodlands, still on sacred rites intent Till your souls be filled with wisdom and your years of exile spent! " " Gracious are thy accents, ruhi" Rama answered thus the sage, " But fair towns and peopled hamlets border on this hermitage, And to see the banished Sita and to see us, much I fear, Crowds of rustics oft will trespass on thy calm devotions here, Far from towns and peopled hamlets, grant us, rubi, in thy grace, Some wild spot where hid in jungle we may pass these years in peace." " Twenty miles from this
