IN CEYLON 153 But the course of nature changes, and the father weeps the son, Youth is fallen, and the aged lives to fight the foe alone ! " Tears of sorrow, slow and silent, fell upon the monarch's breast, Then a swelling rage and passion woke within hitf heaving chest, Like the sun of scorching summer glowed his face in wrathful shame, From his brow and rolling eyeballs issued sparks of living flame ! "Perish she ! " exclaimed the monarch, "she- wolf Sita dies to-day, Indrajit but cleft her image, Ravan will the woman slay ! " Followed by his trembling courtiers, regal robes and garments rent, Ravan shaking in his passion to Asokas garden went, Maddened by his wrath and anguish, with hisdrawn and flaming sword, Sought the shades where soft-eyed Sita silent sorrowed for her lord. Woman's blood the royal sabre on that fatal day had stained, But his true and faithful courtiers Ravan's wrathful hand restrained, And the watchful Raksha females girdled round the sorrowing dame, Flung them on the path of Ravan to withstand a deed of shame. " Not against a woman, Ravan, mighty warriors raise their hand, In the battle," spake the courtiers, " duty bids thee use thy brand, Versed in Veda* and in learning, court not thus a caitiff's fate, \ Woman's blood pollutes our valour, closes heaven's eternal gate ! !' Leave the woman in her sorrow, mount upon thy battle car, Faithful to our king and leader we will wake the voice of war, 'Tis the fourteenth day auspicious of the dark and waning moon, Glory waiteth thee in battle and thy vengeance cbmeth soon, All- resistless in the contest slay thy foeman in his pride, Seek as victor of the combat widowed Sita as thy bride ! " Slow and sullen, dark and silent, Ravan then his wrath restrained, Vengeance on his son's destroyer deep within his bosom reigned ! 154 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA VIII Rayon's Second Battle and Vengeance Voice of woe and lamentation and the cry of woman's wail, Issuing from the homes of Lanka did the monarch's ears assail, And a mighty thought of vengeance waked within the monarch's heart, And he heaved a sigh of anguish as he grasped his bow and dart : " Arm each chief and gallant Raksha ! be our sacred duty done, Ravan seeks a fitting vengeance for his brave and noble son, Mahodar and Virupaksha, Mahaparshwa warrior tall, Arm ! this fated day will witness Lakshman's or your monarch's fall i Call to mind each slaughtered hero, — Khara, Dushan, slain in fight, Kumbha-karna giant warrior, Indrajit of magic might, Earth nor sky shall hide my foemen nor the ocean's heaving swell, Scattered ranks of Rama's forces shall my speedy vengeance tell, Be the red-earth strewn and covered with our countless foemen slain, Hungry wolves and blood-beaked vultures feed upon the ghastly plain, For his great and gallant brother, for his brave and beauteous son, Ravan seeks a fitting vengeance, Rakshas be your duty done ! " House to house, in Lanka's city, Ravan's royal best was heard, Street and lane poured forth their warriors by a mighty passion stirred, With their javelin and sabre, mace and club and axe and pike, Sataghni and bhindipala, quoit and discus quick to strike. ■ And they formed the line of tuskers and the line of battle car, Mule and camel fit for burden and the fiery steed of war, Serried ranks of armed soldiers shook the earth beneath their tread, Horsemen that on wings of lightning o'er the field of battle spread. THE WAR IN CEYLON 155 Drum and conch and sounding trumpet waked the echoes of the sky, Pataha and loud mrldanga and the people's maddening cry, Thundering through the gates of Lanka, R a van's lofty chariot passed, Destined by his fortune, Ravan ne'er again those portals crost ! And the sun was dim and clouded and a sudden darkness fell, Birds gave forth their boding voices and the earth confessed a spell, Gouts of blood in rain descended, startled coursers turned to fly, Vultures swooped upon the banner, jackals yelled their doleful cry, Omens of a dark disaster mantled o'er the vale and rock, And the ocean heaved in billows, nations felt the earthquake's shock! Darkly closed the fatal battle, sturdy Vanars fell in fight, Warlike leaders of the Rakshas perished neath the foeman's might, Mahodhar and Virupaksha were by bold Sugriva slain, Crushed by Angad, Mahaparshwa slumbered lifeless on the plain, But with more than mortal valour Ravan swept the ranks of war, Warriors fell beneath his prowess, fled before his mighty car, Cleaving through the Vanar forces, filled with vengeance deep and dire, Ravan marked the gallant Lakshman flaming like a crimson fire ! Like the tempest cloud of summer Ravan's winged coursers flew, But Bibhishan in his prowess soon the gallant chargers slew, Dashing from his useless chariot Ravan leaped upon the ground, And his false and traitor brother by his dearest foeman found ! Wrathful Ravan marked Bibhishan battling by the foeman's side And he hurled his pond'rous weapon for to slay him in his pride, Lakshman marked the mighty jav'lin as it winged its whizzing flight, Cleft it in its onward passage, saved Bibhishan by his might ! Grimly smiled the angry Ravan gloating in his vengeful wrath, Spake to young and dauntless Lakshman daring thus to cross his path : 156 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " Welcome, Lakshman ! thee I battle for thy deed of darkness done, Face the anger of a father, cruel slayer of the son, By thy skill and by thy valour, false Bibhishan thou hast saved, Save thyself! Deep in this bosom is a cruel grief engraved ! " Father's grief and sad remembrance urged the lightning- wingeVL dart, Ravan's Sakti fell resistless on the senseless Lakshman's heart, Wrathful Rama saw the combat and arose in godlike might, Carless, steed less, wounded Ravan sought his safety in his flight. IX ■. Rama's Lament " Art thou fallen," sorrowed Rama, " weary of this endless strife, Lakshman, if thy days are ended, Rama recks not for his life, Gone is Rama's wonted valour, weapons leave his nerveless hand, Drop his bow and shining arrows, useless hangs his sheathed brand! Art thou fallen, gallant Lakshman, death and faintness on me creep, Weary of this fatal contest let me by my brother sleep, Weary of the strife and triumph, since my faithful friend is gone, Rama follows in his footsteps and his task on earth is done ! Thou hast from the far Avodhya, followed me in deepest wood, In the thickest of the battle thou hast by thy elder stood, Love of woman, love of comrade, trite is love of kith and kind, Love like thine, true-hearted brother, not on earth we often find ! When Sumitra seeks thee, Lakshman, ever weeping for thy sake, When she asks me of her hero, what reply shall Rama make, THE WAR IN CEYLON 157 What reply, when Bharat questions, — Where is he who went to wood, Where is true and faithful Lakshman who beside his elder stood ? What great crime or fatal shadow darkens o'er my hapless life, Victim to the sins of Rama sinless Lakshman falls in strife, Best of brothers, best of warriors, wherefore thus unconscious lie, Mother, wife, and brother wait thee, ope once more thy sleeping eye!" Tara'8 father, wise Susena, gentle consolation lent, Hanuman from distant mountains herbs of healing virtue rent, And by loving Rama tended, Lakshman in his strength arose, Stirred by thoughts of fatal vengeance Rama sought the flying foes. Celestial Arms and Chariot Not in dastard terror Ravan sought his safety in his flight, But to seek fresh steeds of battle ere he faced his foeman's might, Harnessing his gallant coursers to a new and glorious car, Sunlike in its radiant splendour, Ravan came once more to war. Gods in wonder watched the contest of the more than mortal foes, Ravan mighty in his vengeance, Rama lofty in his woes, Gods in wonder marked the heroes, lion-like in jungle wood, Indra sent his arms and chariot where the human warrior stood ! " Speed, Matali" thus spake Indra, "speed thee with my heavenly car, Where on foot the righteous Rama meets his mounted foe in war, Speed, for Ravan* x days are ended, and his moments brief and few, (j Rama strives for right and virtue^ — Gods assist jfa prpve and true ! 1 158 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Brave Matali drove the chariot drawn by steeds like solar ray, Where the true and righteous Rama sought his foe in fatal fray, j Shining arms and heavenly weapons he to lofty Rama gave, — J When the righteous strive and struggle, Gods assist the true and brave1. " Take this car," so said Matali, " which the helping Gods provide, Rama, take these steeds celestial, Indra's golden chariot ride, Take this royal bow and quiver, wear this falchion dread and dire, Viswa-karman forged this armour in the flames of heavenly fire, I shall be thy chariot driver and shall speed the thund'ring car, Slay the sin-polluted Ravan in this last and fetal war ! " Rama mounted on the chariot clad in arms of heavenly sheen, And he mingled in a contest mortal eyes have never seen ! XI Ravan's Third Battle and Fall Gods and mortals watched the contest and the heroes of the war, Ravan speeding on his chariot, Rama on the heavenly car. And a fiercer form the warriors in their fiery frenzy wore, And a deeper weight of hatred on their anguished bosoms bore, Clouds of dread and deathful arrows hid the radiant face of sky, Darker grew the day of combat, fiercer grew the contest high ! Pierced by Ravan's pointed weapons bleeding Rama owned no pain, Rama* 8 arrows keen and piercing sought his foeman's life in vain, Long the dubious battle lasted, and with wilder fury fraught, Wounded, faint, and still unyielding, blind with wrath the rivals fought, Pike and cluband mace and trident scaped from Ravan's vengeful band, Spear and arrows Rama wielded, and his bright and flaming brand! THE WAR IN CEYLON 159 Long the dubious battle lasted, shook the ocean, hill and dale, Winds were hushed in Toiceless terror and the livid sun was pale, Still the dubious battle lasted, until Rama in his ire, Wielded Brahma's deathful weapon flaming with celestial fire ! Weapon which the Saint Agastya had unto the hero given, / Winged as lightning dart of Indra, fatal as the boh of heaven J Wrapped in smoke and flaming flashes, speeding from the circled bow, Pierced the iron heart of Ravan, lain the lifeless hero low, I And a cry of pain and terror from the Raksha ranks arose, And a shout from joying Vanars as they smote their fleeing foes i Heavenly flowers in rain descended on the red and gory plain, And from unseen harps and timbrels rose a soft celestial strain, [/ nd the ocean heaved in gladness, brighter shone the sunlit sky, , ott and cool the gentle zephyrs through the forest murmured by, Sweetest scent and fragrant odours wafted from celestial trees, Fell upon the earth and ocean, rode upon the laden breeze ! Voice of Messing from the bright sky fell on Raghus' valiant son,— " Champion of the true ami righteous / now thy noble task is done J " XII Mandodari's Lament and the Funerals " Hast thou fallen," wept in anguish Ravan's first and eldest bride, Mandodari, slender-waisted, Queen of Lanka's state and pride, " Hast thou fallen, king and consort, more than Gods in warlike might, Slain by man, whom bright Immortals feared to face in dubious fight ? Not a man ! — the Dark Destroyer came to thee in mortal form, Or the heaven-traversing Vishnu, Indra ruler of the storm, i&> THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE. OF INDIA Gods of sky in shape of Vanars helped the dark and cruel deed, Girdling round the Discus- Wielder in the battled direst need ! Well I knew? — when Khara, Dushan, were by Rama's prowess slain, Rama was no earthly mortal, he who crossed the mighty main, Well I kn*w* — when with his army he invested Lanka's gate, Rama was no earthly mortal hut the messenger of Fate, And I prayed, — the faithful Sita might unto her consort go, For 'tis writ that nations perish for a righteous woman's, woe, But for impious Just of woman,— ~all forgetful of thy wife, Thou hast lost thy crown and kingdom, thou hast lost thy fated life ! Woe to me ! the sad remembrance haunts my tortured bosom still, Of our days on famed Kajlasa or on Meru's golden hill, Gone the days of joy and gladness, Mandodari's days are done* Since her lord and king and husband from her dear^embrace is gone ! " Sorely wept the Queen of Lanka ; Rama, tender, tearful, true, Bade the funeral rites and honours to a fallen foeraan due, And they heaped the wood of Chandan and the fragrant garland laid, Oh the pyre they lifted Ravan in the richest robes arrayed, Weeping queens and sorrowing Rakshas round their fallen leader stood, Brahmans with their chaunted wwwi/fwpiled the dry and scented wood, Oil and cords and sacred offerings were upon the altar laid, And a goat of inky darkness as a' sacrifice wasftt&yedi* Piously the good Pibhishan lighted Rayaa's funeral pyre, And the zephyrs gently blowing fanned the bright and Waring fire, Slow and sad with due ablutions mourners left Ac funeral site, Rama then unstrung his weapon, laid aside his arras of might. BOOK XI RAJYA-ABHISHEKA {Rama's Return and Consecration) 'T'HE real Epic ends with the war, and with Rama's happy return to Ayodhya. Sita proves her stainless virtue by an Ordeal of Fire, and returns with her lord and with Lakshman in an aerial car, which Ravan had won from the Gods, and which Bibhishan made over to Rama. Indian poets are never tired of descriptions of nature, and the poet of the Ramayana takes advan- tage of Rama's journey from Ceylon to Oudh to give us a bird's-eye view of the whole continent of India, as well as to recapitulate the principal incidents of his great Epic. The gathering of men at Ayodhya, the greetings to Rama, and his consecration by the Vedic bard Vasishtha, are among the most pleasing passages in the whole poem. And
