Book. TheJove of a Raksha princess for Rama and for Lakshman is re jectodr with scorn, and smarting under insult and punishment she fires her brother Ravan, the king of Ceylon, witn a thirst for vengeance. The dwellers of Ceylon are described in the Epic as monsters of various forms, and able to assume different sjiapes at wi}lf Ravan sends Maricha in the shape of a beautiful, d^er to tempt ^w^ Rama and Lakshman from the cottage, and then finds his chance for stealing away the unprotected Sita. The misfortunes of our lives, according to Indian thinkers, are- but the results of our misdeeds ; calamities are brought about by our sins. And thus wej find in the Indian Epic, that a dark and foul suspicion against Lakshman crossed the stainless mind of Sita, and words of unmerited insult fell from her gentle, lips, on the ere of the great calamity which clouded her life ever after. It was the only occasion on which the ideal woman of the Epic harboured an unjust thought or spoke an angry word ; and' it was followed1 by a tragic fate which few women on earth have suffered'. To the millions of men and wonjen in Iindja, Sita re^ajns to this, dayf the. ideal of female love and female cjevoriqn . her, dark suspicions, a^gains^ Lakshman sprang out of an excess of her affectjpn for her husband ; and her tragic fate and long trial proved that undying love. The portions translated in this Book form the whole or the main portions of Sections, xvii,, xviii,, xliii.^xly., xlvi.,f xlvjj;, and xjix, of Book iii. of U>e ordinal t^xt. SITA LOST 89 I Surpa-nakha in Love As the Moon with starry Chitra dwells in azure skies above, In his lonesome leafy cottage Rama dwelt in Sita's love, And with Lakshman strong and valiant, quick to labour and obey, Tales of bygone times recounting Rama passed the livelong day. ' And it so befell, a maiden, dweller of the darksome wood, Led by wandering thought or fancy once before the cottage stood, Surpa-nakha, Raksha maiden, sister of the Raksha lord* Came and looked with eager longing till her soul was passion-stirred ! Looked on Rama lion-chested, mighty-armed,, lotus-eyed, Stately as the jungle tusker, with hia crown of tresses tied, Looked on Rama lofty-fronted, with a royal visage graced,. Like Kandarpa young and lustrous, lotus-hued and lotus-faced ! What though she a Raksha maiden, poor in beauty plain in face, Fell her glances passion-laden on the prince of peerless grace, What though wild her eyes and tresses, and her accents counselled fear, Soft-eyed Rama fired her bosom, and hia sweet voice thrilled her ear, What though bent on deeds unholy, holy Rama won her heart, And, for love makes bold a femaje, thus did. she her thoughts impart : " Who be thou in hermit's vestments, in thy native beauty bright, Friended by a youthful woman, armed with thy bow of might, Who be thou in these lone regions where the Rakshas hold their sway, Wherefore in a lonely cottage in this darksome jungle stay?" With his wonted truth and candour Rama spake sedate and bold, And the story of his exile to the Raksha maiden told : 90 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " Dasa-ratha of Ayodhya ruled with Indra's godlike fame, And his eldest, first born Rama, by his mandate here I came, Younger Lakshman strong and valiant doth with me these forests roam, And my wife, Videha's daughter, Sita makes with me her home. Duteous to my father's bidding, duteous to my mother's will, Striving in the cause of virtue in the woods we wander still, Tell me, female of the forest, who thou be and whence thy birth, Much I fear thou art a Raksha wearing various forms on earth ! " " Listen," so spake Surpa-nakha, " if my purpose thou wouldst know, I am Raksha, Surpa-nakha, wearing various shapes below, Know my brothers, royal Ravan, Lanka's lord from days of old, Kumbha- karna dread and dauntless, and Bibhishan true and. bold, Khara and the doughty Dushan with me in these forests stray, But by Rama's love emboldened I have left them on the way ! Broad and boundless is my empire and I wander in my pride. Thee I choose as lord and husband,— cast thy human wife aside, Pale is Sita and mis-shapen, scarce a warrior's worthy wife, To a nobler, lordlier female consecrate thy gallant life ! Human flesh is food of Rakshas ! weakling Sita I will slay, Slay that boy thy stripling brother, — thee as husband I obey, On the peaks of lofty mountains, in the forests dark and lone, We shall range the boundless woodlands and the joys of dalliance prove ! " SITA LOST 91 II Surpa-nakha Punished Rama heard her impious purpose and a gentle smile repressed, To the foul and forward female thus his mocking words addressed : " List, O passion-smitten maiden ! Sita is my honoured wife. With a rival loved and cherished cruel were thy wedded life ! But no consort follows Lakshman, peerless is his comely face, Dauntless is his warlike valour, matchless is his courtly grace. And he leads no wife or consort to this darksome woodland grove, With no rival to thy passion seek his ample-hearted love ! " Surpa-nakha passion-laden then on Lakshman turned her eye, But in merry mocking accents smiling Lakshman made reply : " Ruddy in thy youthful beauty like the lotus in her pride, I am slave of royal Rama, would' st thou be a vassal's bride ? Rather be his younger consort, banish Sita from his arms, Spurning Site's faded beauty let him seek thy fresher charms, Spurning Sita's faded graces let him brighter pleasures prove, Wearied with a woman's dalliance let him court a Raksha's love! " Wrath of unrequited passion raged like madness in her breast, Torn by anger strong as tempest thus her answer she addrest : " Are these mocking accents uttered, Rama, to insult my flame, Feasting on her faded beauty dost thou still revere thy dame ? But beware a Raksha's fury and an injured female's wrath, Surpa-nakha slays thy consort, bears no rival in her path ! " Fawn-eyed Sita fell in terror as the Raksha rose to slay, So beneath the flaming meteor sinks Rohini's softer ray, 92 THE EPIC OF RAMA, 1>RINCE OF INDIA And like Demon of Destruction furious Surpa-nakha came, Rama rose to stop the slaughter and protect his helpless dame. " Brother, we hare acted wrongly, for with those of savage breed, Word in jest is courting danger, — this the penance of our deed, Death perchance or death-like stupor hovers o'er my lov&L dame, Let me wake to life my Sita, chase this female void of shame ! " Lakshman's anger leaped like lightning as the female hovered near, With his 8 word the wrathful warrior cleft her nose and either ear, Surpa-nakha in her anguish raised her accents shrill and high, And the rocks and wooded valleys answered back the dismal cry, Khara and the doughty Dushan heard the far-resounding wail, Saw her red disfigured visage, heard her sad and woeful tale ! Ill Rama's Departure Vainly fought the vengeful Khara, doughty Dushan vainly bled, Rama and the valiant Lakshman strewed the forest with the dead, Till the humbled Surpa-nakha to her royal brother hied, Spake her sorrows unto Ravan and Maricha true and tried. Shape of deer unmatched in beauty now the deep Maricha wore, Golden tints upon his haunches, sapphire on his antlers bore, Till the woodland-wand'ring Sita marked the creature in his pride, Golden was his neck of beauty, silver white his flank and side ! " Come, my lord and gallant Lakshman," thus the raptur'd Ska-spake, " Mark the deer of wondrous radiance browsing by the forest brake! " " Much my heart misgives me, sister," Lakshman hesitated still, " 'Tis some deep deceitful Raksha wearing every shape at will, SITA iOST 93 Monarchs wand'rfftg in this forest, hunting in this lonely glen, Oft waylaid by artful Rakshas are by deep devices slain, Bright as day-god or Gandharva, woodland scenes they lore to stray, Till they fall upon the heedless, quick to slaughter and to slay, Trust me, not in jewelled lustre forest creatures haunt the green, 'Tis some may a and illusion, trust not what thy eyes have seen ! " Vainly spake* ihe watchful Lakshman in the arts df Rakshas Skilled, For with forceful fascination Sita's inmost heart was thrilled, " Husband, good and ever gracious," sweetly thiis implored the wife, " I would tend this thing of beauty, — sharer of riiy forest life! I have witnessed in this jungle graceful creatures passing fair, Choivri and the gentle roebuck, antelope of beauty rare, I have seen the lithesome monkey sporting in the branches' shade, Grizzly bear that feeds on Mahua, and the deer that crops the blade, I have marked the stately wild bull dash into the deepest wood, And the Ktnnar strange and wondrous as in sylvan wilds he stood, But these eyes have never rested on a form so wondrous fair, On a shape so full of beauty, decked with tints so rich and rare ! Bright his bosom gem-bespangled, soft the lustre of his eye, Lighting up the gloomy jungle as the Moon lights up the sky, And his gentle voice and glances and his graceful steps and light, Fill my heart with eager longing and my soul with soft delight ! If alive that beauteous' object thou canst capture in thy way, As thy Ska's sweet companion in these woodlands he will stay, And when done our days of exile, to Ayodhya will repair, Dwell in Sita's palace chamber nursed by Sita's tender care, And our royal brother -Bharatr oft will praise hk strength and speed, And tbe queeris and royal mothers. pause the gentle thing to feed! 94 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA If alive this wary creature be it, husband, hard to take, Slay him and his skin of lustre cherish for thy Site's sake, I will as a golden carpet spread the skin upon the grass, Sweet memento of this forest when our forest days will pass ! Pardon if an eager longing which befits a woman ill, . And an unknown fascination doth my inmost bosom fill, As I mark his skin bespangled and his antlers' sapphire ray, And his coat of starry radiance glowing in the light of day ! " Rama bade the faithful Lakshman with the gentle Site stay, Long through woods and gloomy gorges vainly held his cautious way, Vainly set the snare in silence by the lake and in the dale, 'Scaping every trap, Maricha, pierced by Rama's arrows fell, Imitating Rama's accents uttered forth his dying cry : " Speed, my faithful brother Lakshman, helpless in the woods I die ! " IV Lakshman 's Departure " Heardst that distant cry of danger ? " questioned Site in distress, " Woe, to me ! who in my frenzy sent my lord to wilderness, Speed, brave Lakshman, help my Rama, doleful was his distant cry, And my fainting bosom falters and a dimness clouds my eye ! To the dread and darksome forest with thy keenest arrows speed, Help thy elder and thy monarch, sore his danger and his need, For perchance the cruel Rakshas gather round his lonesome path, As the mighty bull is slaughtered by the lions in their wrath ! " Spake the hero : " Fear not, Site ! Dwellers of the azure height, Rakshas nor the jungle-rangers match the peerless Rama's might, SITA LOST *5 Rama knows no dread or danger, and his mandate still I own, And I may not Jea*e thee, Lady, in this cottage all alone! Cast aside thy causeless terror ; in the sky or earth below, In the nether regions, Rama knows no peer or equal foe, He shall slay the deer of jungle, he shall voice no dastard cry, 'Tis some trick of wily Rakshas in this forest dark and high ! Sita, thou hast heard my elder bid me in this cottage stay, | Lakshman may not leave thee, Lady, for his duty — to obey,! Ruthless Rakshas roam the forest to revenge their leader slain, Various are their arts and accents ; chase thy thought of causeless pain ! " Sparkled Sita's eye in anger, frenzy marked her speech and word, For a woman's sense is clouded by the danger of her lord : " Markest thou my Rama's danger with a cold and callous heart, Courtest thou the death of elder in thy deep deceitful art, In thy semblance of compassion doest thou hide a cruel craft, As in friendly guise the foeman hides his death-compelling shaft, Following like a faithful younger in this dread and lonesome land, Seekest thou the death of elder to enforce his widow's hand ? False thy hope as foul thy purpose ! Sita is a faithful wife, Sita follows saintly Rama, true in death as true in life ! " Quivered Lakshman's frame in anguish and the tear stood in his eye, Fixed in faith and pure in purpose, calm and bold he made reply « " Unto me a Queen and Goddess, — as a mother to a son,—* Answer to thy heedless censure patient Lakshraan speaketh none, Daughter of Videha's monarch,— pardon if I do thee wrong, — Fickle it the faith of woman, poison-dealing is her tongue ! 96 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And thy censure, trust me, Lady, scathes me like a burning dart, Free from guile is Lakskman's purpose, free from sin is Lakshmaa's heart, Witness ye my truth of purpose, unseen dwellers of the wood, Witness, I for Sita's safety by my elder's mandate stood, Duteous to my queen and elder, I have toiled and worked in rain, Dark suspicion and dishonour cast on me a needless stain ! Lady I I obey thy mandate, to my elder now I go, Guardian Spirits of the forest watch thee from each secret foe, Omens dart and signs of danger meet my pained and aching sight, May I see thee by thy Rama, guarded by his conquering might ! " Ravan's Coming Ravan watched the happy moment burning with a vengeful spite, Came to sad and sorrowing Sita in the guise of anchorite, y ' s Tufted hair and russet garment, sandals on his feet he wore, And depending from his shoulders on a staff his vessel bore. And
