us, gather but they blend not heart with heart, Winter clouds are big with thunder but they shed no freshening rain, False relations smile and greet us but their soothing words are vain, Bees are tempted by the honey but from flower to flower they range, False relations share our favour but in secret seek a change ! Lying is thy speech, Bibhishan, secret envy lurks within, Thou wouldst rule thy elder's empire, thou wouldst wed thy elder's queen, Take thy treason to the foemen, — brother's blood I may not shed, — Other Raksha craven-hearted by my royal hands had bled ! " 136 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Bibhiahan's Departure " This to me ! " Bibhishan answered, as with fiery comrades four, Rose in arms the wrathful Raksha and in fury rushed before, " But I spare thee, royal Ravan, angry words thy lips hare passed, False and lying and unfounded is the censure thou hast cast ! True Bibhishan sought thy safety, strove to save his elder's reign,— Speed thee now to thy destruction since all counsel is in vain, Many are thy smiling courtiers who with honeyed speech beguile,— Few are they with truth and candour speak their purpose void of guile! Blind to reason and to wisdom, Ravan, seek thy destined fate, For thy impious lust of woman, for thy dark unrighteous hate, Blind to danger and destruction, deaf to word of counsel given, By the flaming shafts of Rama thou shalt die by will of Heaven ! Yet, 0 ! yet, my king and elder, let me plead with latest breath, 9 Gainst the death of race and kinsmen, 'gainst my lord and brother's de*t&, Ponder yet, 0 Raksha monarch, save thy race and save thy own, Ravan, part we now for ever, — guard thy ancient sea-girt throne I " BOOK X YUDDHA (The War in Ceylon) DAMA crossed over with his army from India to Ceylon. There is a chain of islands across the strait, and the Indian poet supposes them to be the remains of a vast causeway which Rama built to cross over with his army. The town of Lanka, the capital of Ceylon, was invested, and the war which followed was a succession of sallies by the great leaders and princes of Lanka. But almost every sally was repulsed, every chief was killed, and at last Ravan himself who made the last sally was slain and the war ended. Among the numberless fights described in the original work, those of Ravan himself, his brother Kumbha-karna, and his son Indrajit, are the most important, and oftenest recited and listened to in India; and these have been rendered into English in this Book. And the reader will mark a certain method in the poet's estimate of the warriors who took part in these battles. First and greatest among the warriors was Rama ; he was never beaten by an open foe, never conquered in fair fight. Next to him, and to him only, was Ravan the monarch of Lanka ; he twice defeated Lakshman in battle, and never retreated except before Rama. Next to Rama and to Ravan stood their brothers, Laksh- man and Kumbha-karna ; it is difficult to say who was the best of these two, for they fought only once, and it was a drawn battle. Fifth in order of prowess was Iqdrajit the son of Ravan, but he was the first in his magic art. Concealed in mists by his magic, he twice defeated both Rama and Lakshman ; but in his last battle he had to wage a face to face combat with Lakshman, and was '37 138 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA slain. After these five warriors, pre-eminent for their prowess, various Vanars and Rakshas took their rank. The war ended with the fall of Ravan and his funerals. The portions translated in this Book form the whole or portions of Sections xliv., xlviii., lix., lxvi., lxvii. and lxxiii., an abstract of Sections lxxv. to xci., and portions of Sections xciii., xcvi., d, cii., ciii., cix., ex., and cxiii. of Book vi. of the original text. I Indrajit's First Battle—The Serpent-Noose Darkly round the leaguered city Rama's countless forces lay, Far as Ravan cast his glances in the dawning light of day, Wrath and anguish shook his bosom and the gates he opened wide, And with ranks of charging Rakshas sallied with a Raksha's pride! All the day the battle lasted, endless were the tale to tell, What unnumbered Vanars perished and what countless Rakshas fell, Darkness came, the fiery foemen urged the still unceasing fight, Struggling with a deathless hatred fiercer in the gloom of night ! Onward came resistless Rakshas, laid Sugriva's forces low, Crushed the broken ranks of Vanars, drank the red blood of the foe, Bravely fought the scattered Vanars facing still the tide of war, Struggling with the charging tusker and the steed and battle car, Till at last the gallant Lakshman and the godlike Rama came, And they swept the hosts of Ravan like a sweeping forest flame, And their shafts like hissing serpents on the falt'ring foemen fell, Fiercer grew the sable midnight with the dying shriek and yell \ THE WAR IN CEYLON 139 Dust arose like clouds of summer from each thunder-sounding car, From the hoofs of charging coursers, from the elephants of war, Streams of red blood warm and bubbling issued from the countless slain, Flooded battle's dark arena like the floods of summer rain, Sound of trumpet and of bugle, drum and horn and echoing shell, And the neigh of charging coursers and the tuskers' dying wail, And the yell of wounded Rakshas and the Vanars* fierce delight, Shook the earth and sounding welkin, waked the echoes of the night ! Six bright arrows Rama thundered from his weapon dark and dread, Iron-tootheM Bajra-dranshtra and his fainting comrades fled, Dauntless still the serried Rakshas, wave on wave succeeding came, Perished under Rama's arrows as the moths upon the flame ! Indrajit the son of Ravan, Lanka's glory and her pride, Matchless in his magic weapons came and turned battle's tide, What though Angad in his fury had his steeds and driver slaved, Indrajit hid in the midnight battled from its friendly shade, Shrouded in a cloud of darkness Still he poured his darts like rain, On young Lakshman and on Rama and on countless Vanars slain, Matchless in his magic weapons, then he hurled his Afa^a-dart, Serpent noose upon his foemen draining life blood from their heart ! Vainly then the royal brothers fought the cloud-enshrouded foe, Vainly sought the unseen warrior dealing unresisted blow, Fastened by a noose of Naga forced by hidden foe to yield, Rama and the powerless Lakshman fell and fainted on the field ! i4o THE EPIC OP RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA II Sita's Lament Indrajit ere dawned the morning entered in his father's hall, Spake of midnight's darksome contest, Rama's death and Laksh- man's fall, And the proud and peerless Ravan clasped his brave and gallant son. Praised him for his skill and valour and his deed of glory done, And with dark and cruel purpose bade his henchmen yoke his car, Bade them take the sorrowing Sita to the gory field of war ! Soon they harnessed royal coursers and they took the weeping wife, Where her Rama, pierced and bleeding, seemed bereft of sense and life, Brother lay beside his brother with their shattered mail and bow, Arrows thick and dark with red blood spake the conquest of the foe, Anguish woke in Sita's bosom and a dimness filled her eye, And a widow's nameless sorrow burst in widow's mournful cry : " Rama, lord and king and husband ! didst thou cross the billowy sea, Didst thou challenge death and danger, court thy fate to rescue me, Didst thou hurl a fitting vengeance on the cruel Raksha force, Till the hand of hidden foeman checked thy all-resistless course ? Breathes upon the earth no warrior who could face thee in the fight, Who could live to boast his triumph o'er thy world-subduing might, But the will of Fate is changeless, Death is mighty in his sway, — Peerless Rama, faithful Lakshman, sleep the sleep that knows no day! But I weep not for my Rama nor for Lakshman young and brave, They have done a warrior's duty and have found a warrior's grave, THE WAR IN CEYLON 141 And I weep not for my sorrows, — sorrow marked me from my birth,-Ai Child of Earth I seek in suffering bosom of my mother Earth ! \V But I grieve for dear Kausalya, sonless mother, widowed queen, How she reckons days and seasons in her anguish ever green, How she waits with eager longing till her Rama's exile o'er, He would soothe her lifelong sorrow, bless her aged eyes once more, Sita's love ! Ayodhya's monarch ! Queen Kausalya's dearest born ! Rama soul of truth and virtue sleeps the sleep that knows no morn ! " Sorely wept the sorrowing Sita in her accents soft and low, And the silent stars of midnight wept to witness Sita's woe, But Trijata her companion, — though a Raksha woman she, — Felt her soul subdued by sadness, spake to Sita tenderly : " Weep not, sad and saintly Sita, shed not widow's tears in vain, For thy lord is sorely wounded, but shall live to fight again, Rama and the gallant Lakshman, fainting, not bereft of life, They shall live to fight and conquer, — thou shalt be a happy wife Mark the Vanars' marshalled forces, listen to their warlike cries, 'Tis not thus the soldiers gather when a chief and hero dies, 'Tis not thus round lifeless leader muster warriors true and brave, For when falls the dying helmsman, sinks the vessel in the wave ! Mark the ring of hopeful Vanars, how they watch o'er Rama's face, How they guard the younger Lakshman beaming yet with living grace, Trust me, sad and sorrowing Sita, marks of death these eyes can trace, Shade of death's decaying fingers sweeps not o'er thy Rama's face ! Listen more, my gentle Sita, though a captive in our keep, For thy woes and for thy anguish see a Raksha woman weep, Though thy Rama armed in battle is our unrelenting foe, For a true and stainless warrior see a Raksha filled with woe I 142 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Fainting on the field of battle, blood-ensanguined in their face, They shall live to fight and conquer, worthy of their gallant race, Cold nor rigid are their features, darkness dwells not on their brow, Weep not thus, my gentle Ska, — ^hasten we to Lanka now.'9 And Trijata spake no falsehood, by the winged Garuda's skill, Rama and the valiant Lakshman lived to fight their foemen still t III Ravan's First Battle— The Javelin-Stroke 'Gainst the God-assisted Rama, Ravan's efforts all were vain, Leaguered Lanka vainly struggled in her adamantine chain, Wrathful Rakshas with their forces vainly issued through the gate, Chiefs and serried ranks of warriors met the same resistless fate ! Dark-eyed chief Dhumraksha sallied with the fierce tornado's shock, Hanuman of peerless prowess slaved him with a rolling rock, Iron-toothed Vajra-danshtra dashed through countless Vanars slain, But the young and gallant Angad laid him lifeless on the plain, Akampan unshaken warrior issued out of Lanka's wall, Hanuman was true and watchful, speedy was the Raksha's fall, Then the mighty-armed Prahasta strove to break the hostile line, But the gallant Nila felled him as the woodman fells the pine ! Bravest chiefs and countless soldiers sallied forth to face the fight, Broke not Rama's iron circle, 'scaped not Rama's wond'rous might, Ravan could no longer tarry for his mightiest chiefs were slain, Foremost leaders* dearest kinsmen, lying on the gory plain ! THE WAR IN CEYLON 143 " Lofty scorn of foes unworthy spared them from my flaming ire, But the blood of slaughtered kinsmen claims from me a vengeance dire," Speaking thus the wrathful Ravan mounted on his thundering car, Flame-resplendent was the chariot drawn by matchless steeds of war ! Beat of drum and voice of sankha and the Raksha's battle cry, Song of triumph, chanted mantra, smote the echoing vault of sky, And the troops like cloudy masses with their eyes of lightning fire Girt their monarch, as his legions girdle Rudra in his ire ! Rolled the car with peal of thunder through the city's lofty gate, And each fierce and fiery Raksha charged with warrior's deathless hate, And the Vigour of the onset cleft the stunned and scattered foe, As a strong bark cleaves the billows riding on the ocean's brow ! Brave Sugriva king of Vanars met the foeman fierce and strong, And a rock with mighty effort on the startled Ravan flung, Vain the toil; disdainful Ravan dashed aside the flying rock, Brave Sugriva pierced by arrows fainted neath the furious shock. Next Susena chief and elder, Nala and Gavaksha bold, Hurled them on the path of Ravan speeding in his car of gold, Vainly heaved the rock and missile, vainly did with trees assail, Onward sped the conquering Ravan, pierced the fainting Vanars fell. Hanuman the son of Marut next against the Raksha came, Fierce and strong as stormy Marut, warrior of unrivalled fame, But the Raksha's mighty onset gods nor mortals might sustain, Hanuman in red blood welt' ring rolled upon the gory plain. Onward rolled the car of Ravan, where the dauntless Nila stood, Armed with rock and tree and missile, thirsting for the Raksha's blood, 144 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Vainly fought the valiant Nila, pierced by Ravan's pointed dart, On the gory field of battle poured the red blood of his heart* Onward through the scattered forces Ravan's conquering chariot came, Where in pride and dauntless valour Lakshman stood of warlike fame, Calm and proud the gallant Lakshman marked the all -resistless foe, Boldly challenged Lanka's monarch as he held aloft his bow : " Welcome, mighty Lord of Lanka ! wage with me an equal strife, Wherefore with thy royal prowess seek the humble Vanars' life ? " "Hath thy fate," so answered Ravan, "brought thee to thy deadly foe, Welcome, valiant son of Raghu ! Ravan longs to lay thee low ! " Then they closed in dubious battle, Lanka's Lord his weapon bent, Seven bright arrows, keen and whistling, on the gallant Lakshman sent, Vain the toil, for watchful Lakshman stout of heart and true of aim,
