her loving vow, Ah, the sad the sweet remembrance ! ah, the happy days gone by, Once again, O loving vision, wilt thou gladden Rama's eye ? 126 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Speak again, my faithful vassal, how my Sita wept and prayed, Like the water to the thirsty, dear to me what Sita said, Did she send this sweet remembrance as a blessing from above, As a true and tender token of a woman's changeless love, Did she waft her heart's affection o'er the billows of the sea, Wherefore came she not in person from her foes and fetters free ? Hanuman, my friend and comrade, lead me to the distant isle, Where my soft-eyed Sita lingers midst the Rakshas dark and vile, Where my true and tender consort like a lone and stricken deer, Girt by Rakshas stern and ruthless sheds the unavailing tear, Where she weeps in ceaseless anguish, sorrow-stricken sad and pale, Like the Moon by dark clouds shrouded then her light and lustre fail ! Speak again, my faithful henchman, loving message of my wife, Like some potent drug her accents renovate my fainting life, Arm tby forces, friend Sugriva, Rama shall not brook delay, While in distant Lanka's confines Sita weeps the livelong day, Marshal forth thy bannered forces, cross the ocean in thy might, Rama speeds oh wings of vengeance Lanka's impious lord to smite 1 " BOOK IX RAVANA-SABHA (The Council of War) O AV AN was thoroughly frightened by the. deeds of Hanuman. For Hanuman had not only penetrated into his island and dis- covered Sita in her imprisonment, but had also managed to burn down a great portion of the city before he left the island. Ravan called a Council of War, and as might be expected, all the advisers heedlessly advised war. All but Bibhishan. He was the. youngest brother of Ravan, and condemned the folly and the crime by which Ravan was seek- ing a war with the righteous and unoffending Rama. He advised that Sita should be restored to her lord and peace made with Rama. His voice was drowned in the cries of more violent advisers. It is noticeable that Ravan's second brother, Kumbha-karna, also had the courage to censure his' elder's action. But unlike Bibhishan he was determined to fight for his king whether he was right or wrong. There is a touch of sublimity in this blind and devoted loyalty of Kumbha-karna to the cause of his king and his country. Bibhishan was driven from the court with indignity, and joined the forces of Rama, to whom he gave much valuable information about Lanka and its warriors. The passages translated in this Book form Sections vi., viii., ix., portions of Sections xii. and xv., and the whole of Section xvi. of Book vi. of the original text. xa7 1*8 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Ravan Seeks Advice Monarch of the mighty Rakshas, Ravan spake to warriors all, Spake to gallant chiefs and princes gathered in his Council Hall : " L isten, Princes Chiefs and Warriors ! Hanuman our land hath seen, Stealing through the woods of Lanka unto Rama's prisoned queen, And audacious in his purpose and resistless in his ire, Burnt our turret tower and temple, wasted Lanka's town with fire ! Speak your counsel, gallant leaders, Ravan is intent to hear, Triumph waits on fearless wisdom, speak your thoughts without a fear, Wisest monarchs act on counsel from his men for wisdom known, Next are they who in their wisdom and their daring act alone, Last, un wisest are the monarchs who nor death nor danger weigh, Think not, ask not friendly counsel, by their passions borne away ! Wisest counsel comes from courtiers who in holy lore unite, Next, when varying plans and reasons blending lead unto the right, Last and worst, when stormy passions mark the hapless king's debate, And his friends are disunited when his foe is at the gate ! Therefore freely speak your counsel and your monarch's task shall be But to shape in deed and action what your wisest thoughts decree, Speak with minds and hearts united, shape your willing monarch's deed, Counsel peace, or Ravan's forces to a war of vengeance lead, Ere Sugriva's countless forces cross the vast and boundless main, Ere the wrathful Rama girdles Lanka with a living chain I " THE COUNCIL OF WAR 129 II Prahasta's Speech Dark and high as summer tempest mighty-armed Prahasta rose, Spake in fierce and fiery accents hurling challenge on his foes : "Wherefore, Ravan, quails thy bosom, gods against thee strive in vain, Wherefore fear the feeble mortals, homeless hermits, helpless men ? Hanuman approached in secret, stealing like a craven spy, Not from me in open combat would alive the Vanar fly, Let him come with all his forces, to the confines of the sea I will chase the scattered army and thy town from foemen free ! Not in fear and hesitation Ravan should repent his deed, While his gaHant Raksha forces stand beside him in his need, Not in tears and vain repentance Sita to his consort yield, While his chieftains guard his empire in the battle's gory field ! " III Durmukha's Speech Durmukha of cruel visage and of fierce and angry word, Rose within the Council Chamber, spake to Lanka's mighty lord : " Never shall the wily foeman boast of insult on us flung, Hanuman shall die a victim for the outrage and the wrong ! Stealing in unguarded Lanka through thy city's virgin gate, He hath courted deep disaster, and a dark untimely fate, Stealing in the inner mansions where our dames and damsels dwell, Hanuman shall die a victim, — tale of shame he shall not tell ! i3o THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Need is none of Ravan's army, bid me seek the foe alone, If he hides in sky or ocean or in nether regions thrown, Need is none of gathered forces, Ravan's mandate I obey, I will smite the bold intruder and his Vanar forces slay ! " IV Vajra-danshtra's Speech Iron toothed Vajra-danshtra then arose in wrath and pride, . And his blood-stained mace of battle held in fury by his side, " Wherefore, Ravan, waste thy forces on the foemen poor and rile, Hermit Rama and his brother, Hanuman of impious wile, Bid me, — with this mace of battle proud Sugriva I will slay, Chase the helpless hermit brothers to the forests far away ! Or to deeper counsel listen ! Varied shapes the Rakshas wear, Let them, wearing human visage, dressed as Bharat's troops appear, Succour from his ruling brother Rama will in gladness greet, Then with mace and blood-stained sabre we shall lay them at our feet, Rock and javelin and arrow we shall on our foemen hail, Till no poor surviving Vanar lives to tell the tragic tale ! " V Speech of Nikumbha and Vajra-hanu Then arose the brave Nikumbha, — Kumbha-karna's son was he,— Spake his young heart's mighty passion in his accents bold and free ; " Need is none, O mighty monarch, for a battle or a war* ' Bid me meet the homeless Rama and his brother wand 'ring far, THE COUNCIL OF WAR 131 Bid me face the proud Sugriva, Hanuman of deepest wile, I will rid thee of thy foemen and of Vanars poor and vile ! " Rose the chief with jaw of iron, Vajra4ianu fierce and young, Licked his lips like hungry tiger with his red and lolling tongue : " Wherefore, monarch, dream of battle ? Rakshas feed on human gore, Let me feast upon thy foemen by the ocean's lonely shore, Rama and his hermit brother, Hanuman who hides in wood, Angad and the proud Sugriva soon shall be my welcome food ! " VI Bibhishan's Warning Twenty warriors armed and girded in the Council Hall arose, Thirsting for a war of vengeance, hurling challenge on the foes, But Bibhishan deep in wisdom, — Ravan's youngest brother he, — Spake the word or solemn warning for his eye could farthest see : " Pardon, king and honoured elder, if Bibhishan lifts his voice 'Gainst the wishes of the warriors and the monarch's fatal choice, Firm in faith and strong in forces Rama comes with conqu'ring might, Vain against a righteous warrior would unrighteous Ravan fight ! Think him not a common Vanar who transpassed the ocean wave, Wrecked thy city tower and temple and a sign and warning gave, Think him not a common hermit who Ayodhya ruled of yore, Crossing India's streams and mountains, thunders now on Lanka's shore! What dark deed of crime or folly hath the righteous Rama done, That you stole his faithful contort unprotected ar,d alone, 132 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA What offence or nameless insult hath the saintly Sita given, She who chained in Lanka's prison pleads in piteous tears to Heaven? Take my counsel, king and elder, Sita to her lord restore, Wipe this deed of wrong and outrage, Rama's righteous grace implore, Take my counsel, Raksha monarch, vain against him is thy might, Doubly arraeVi is the hero, — he who battles for the right ! Render Sita to her Rama ere with vengeance swift and dire, He despoils our peopled Lanka with his bow and brand and fire, Render wife unto her husband ere in battle's dread array, Rama swoops upon thy empire like a falcon on its prey, Render to the lord his consort ere with blood of Rakshas slain, Rama soaks the land of Lanka to the margin of the main ! Listen to my friendly counsel, — though it be I stand alone, — Faithful friend but fiery foeman is this Dasa-ratha's son, Listen to my voice of warning, — Rama's shafts are true and keen, Flaming like the with'ring sunbeams on the summer's parchexl green, Listen to my soft entreaty, — righteousness becomes the brave, Cherish peace and cherish virtue and thy sons and daughters save ! " VII Kumbha kama's Determination Ravan's brother Kumbha-karna, from his wonted slumber woke, Mightiest he of all the Rakshas, thus in solemn accents spoke : " Truly speaks the wise Bibhishan ; ere he stole a hermit's wife, Ravan should have thought and pondered, courted not a causeless strife, THE COUNCIL OF WAR 133 Ere he did this deed of folly, Ravan should have counsel sought, Tardy is the vain repentance when the work of shame is wrought ! Word of wisdom timely spoken saves from death and dangers dire, Vain is grief for crime committed, — offerings to unholy fire, Vain is hero's worth or valour if by foolish counsel led, Toil and labour fail and perish save when unto wisdom wed, And the foeman speeds in triumph o'er a heedless monarch's might, As through gaps of Krauncha mountains hansas speed their southern flight! Ravan, thou hast sought unwisely Sita in her calm retreat, As the wild and heedless hunter feeds upon the poisoned meat, Nathless, faithful Kumbha-karna will his loyal duty know, / He shall fight his monarch's battle, he shall face his brother's foe !; True to brother and to monarch, be he right or be he wrong, Kumbha-karna fights for Lanka 'gainst her foemen fierce and strong, ] Recks not if the mighty Indra and Vivasvat cross his patft?t Or the wild and stormy Maruts, Agni in his fiery wrathjJJ For the Lord of Sky shall tremble when he sees my stature high, And he hears his thunders echoed by my loud and answering cry, Rama armed with ample quiver shall no second arrow send, Ere I slay him in the battle and his limb from limb I rend ! Wiser heads than Kumbha-karna right and true from wrong may know, Faithful to his race and rhonatch he shall face the haughty foe, Joy thee in thy pleasures, Ravan, rule thy realm in regal pride, When I slay the hermit Rama, widowed Sita be thy bride^ ! " dbyGpogle 134 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA VIII Indrajit's Assurance Indrajit the son of Ravan then his lofty purpose told, Midst the best and boldest Rakshas none so gallant, none so bold r " Wherefore, noble king and father, pale Bibhishan's counsel hear, Scion of the race of Rakshas speaks not thus in dastard fear, In this race of valiant Rakshas, known for deeds of glory done, Feeble-hearted, faint in courage, save Bibhishan, there is none 1 Matched with meanest of the Rakshas what are sons of mortal men, What are homeless human brothers hiding in the hermit's den, Shall we yield to weary wand'rers, driven from their distant home, Chased from throne and father's kingdom in the desert woods to roam? Lord of sky and nether regions, Ikdra 'neath my weapon fell, Pale Immortals know my valour and my warlike deeds can tell, Indra's tusker, huge Airavat,. by my prowess overthrown, Trumpeted its anguished accents, shaking sky and earth with groan, Mighty God 8 and dauntless Daityas fame of Indrajit may know, And he yields not, king and father, to a homeless human foe!'" IX Rmvan's Decision Anger swelled in Ravan's bosom as he cast his blood-red eye On Bibhishan calm and fearless, and he spake in accents high : „ Rather dwell with open foemen or in homes where cobras haunt, Than with faithless friends who falter and whom fears of danger daunt! THE COUNCIL OF WAR 135 0, the love of near relations ! — false and faithless, full of guile,-J- How they sorrow at my glory, at my danger how they smile, f How they grieve with secret anguish when my loftier virtues shine, How they harbour jealous envy when deserts and fame are mine, How they scan with curious vision every fault that clouds my path, How they wait with eager longing till I fall in Fortune's wrath ! Ask the elephants of jungle how their captors catch and bind,-!- Not by fire and feeble weapons, but by treason of their kind, | Not by javelin or arrow, — little for these arms they care,-^- But their false and fondling females lead them to the hunter's snare ! Long as nourishment and vigour shall impart the milk of cow, Long as women shall be changeful, hermits holy in their vow, Aye, so long shall near relations hate us in their inner mind, Mark us with a secret envy though their words be ne'er so kind ! Rain -drops fall upon the lotus but unmi ogling hang apart, False relations round
