Prayaga," spake the rtthi pond' ring well, " Is a lonely hill and jungle where some ancient hermits dwell, Chitra-kuta, Peak of Beauty, where the forest creatures stray, And in every bush and thicket herds of lightsome monkeys play, Men who view its towering summit are on lofty thoughts inclined, Earthly pride nor earthly passions cloud their pure and peaceful mind, Hoary-headed ancient hermits, hundred autumns who have done, By their faith and lofty penance heaven's eternal bliss have won, Holy is the fair seclusion for thy purpose suited well, Or if still thy heart inclineth, here in peace and comfort dwell ! " Spake the rishi Bharad-vaja, and with every courteous rite, Cheered his guests with varied converse till the silent hours of night, Fourth night of the princes' exile in Prayaga' 8 hermitage, Passed the brothers and fair Sita honoured by Prayaga's Sage. THE DEATH OF THE KING 55 VII Crossing the Jumna— Valmiki's Hermitage Morning dawned, and faithful Sita with the brothers held her way, Where the dark and eddying waters of the sacred Jumna stray, Pondering by the rapid river long the thoughtful brothers stood, Then with stalwart arms and axes felled the sturdy jungle wood, Usira of strongest fibre, slender bamboo smooth and plain, Jambu branches intertwining with the bent and twisting cane, And a mighty raft constructed, and with creepers scented sweet, Lakahman for the gentle Sita made a soft and pleasant seat. Then the rustic bark was floated, framed with skill of woodman's craft, By her loving lord supported Sita stepped upon the raft, And her raiments and apparel Rama by his consort laid, And the axes and the deerskins, bow and dart and shining blade, Then with stalwart arms the brothers plied the bending bamboo oar, And the strong raft gaily bounding left for Jumna's southern shore. " Goddess of the glorious Jumna ! " so the pious Sita prayed, " Peaceful be my husband's exile in the forest's darksome shade, May he safely reach Ayodhya, and a thousand fattened kine, Hundred jars of sweet libation, mighty Jumna, shall be thine, Grant that from the woods returning he may see his home again, Grant that honoured by his kinsmen he may rule his loving men ! " On her breast her arms she folded while the princes plied the oar, And the bright bark bravely bounding reached the wooded southern shore. 56 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA And the wanderers from Ayodhya on the river's margin stood. Where the unknown realm extended mantled by unending wood, Gallant Lakshman with his weapons went before the path to clear, Soft-eyed Sita followed gently, Rama fallowed in the rear. Oft from tree and darksome jungle, Lakshman ever true and brave, Plucked the fruit or smiling blossom and to gentle Sita gave, Oft to Rama turned his consort, pleased and curious evermore, Asked the name of tree or creeper, fruit or flower unseen before. Still with brotherly affection Lakshman brought each dewy spray, Bud or blossom of wild beauty from the woodland bright and gay, Still with eager joy and pleasure Sita turned 1ier eye once more, Where the tuneful swans and saras flocked on Jumna's sandy shore. Two miles thus they walked and wandered and thebek of forest passed, Slew the wild deer of the jungle, spread on leaves their rich repast, Peacocks flew around them gaily, monkeys leaped on branches bent, Fifth night of their endless wanderings in the forest thus they spent. " Wake, my love, and list the warblings and the voices of the wood," Thus spake Rama when the morning on the eastern mountains stood, Sita woke and gallant Lakshman, and they sipped the sacred wave, To the hill of Chitra-kuta held their way serene and brave. " Mark, my love," so Rama uttered, " every bush and tree and flower, Tinged by radiant light of morning sparkles in a golden shower, Mark the flaming flower of {Gnsuk and the Vilwa in its pride, Luscious fruits in wild profusion ample store of food provide, Mark the honeycombs suspended from each tall and stately tree, How from every virgin blossom steals her store the faithless, bee ! THE DEATH OF THE KING 57 Oft the lone and startled wild cock sounds its clarion full and clear, And from flowering fragrant forests peacocks send the answering cheer, Oft the elephant of jungle ranges in this darksome wood, For yon peak is Chitra-kuta loved by saints and hermits good, Oft the chanted songs of hermits echo through its sacred grove, Peaceful on its shady uplands, Sita, we shall live and rove ! " Gently thus the princes wandered through the fair and woodland scene, F r uits and blossoms lit the branches, feathered songsters filled the green, Anchorites and ancient hermits lived m every sylvan grove, And a sweet and sacred stillness filled the woods with peace and love! Gently thus the princes wandered to the holy hermitage, Where in lofty contemplation lived the mighty Saint and Sage, Heaven inspired thy song, Valmiki ! Ancient Bard of ancient day, Deed 8 of virtue and of valour live in thy undying lay ! And the Bard received the princes with a father's greetings kind, Bade them live in Chitra-kuta with a pure and peaceful mind, To the true and faithful Lakshman, Rama then bis purpose said, And of leaf and forest timber Lakshman soon a cottage made. " So our sacred Sattras sanction," thus the righteous Rama spake, " Holy offering we should render when our dwelling-home we make, Slay the black buck, gallant Lakshman, and a sacrifice prepare, For the moment is auspicious and the day is bright and fair." Lakshman slew a mighty black-buck, with the antlered trophy came, Placed the carcass consecrated by the altar's blazing flame, Radiant round the mighty offering tongues of red fire curling shone, And the buck was duly roasted and the tender meat was done. Pure from bath, with sacred mantra Rama did the holy rite, And invoked the bright Immortals for to bless the dwelling site, 58 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA To the kindly Viswa-devas, and to Rudra fierce and strong. And to Vishnu Lord of Creatures, Rama raised the sacred song. Righteous rite was duly rendered for the forest-dwelling made. And with true and deep devotion was the sacred mantra prayed. And the worship of the Bright Ones purified each earthly stain, Pure- sou led Rama raised the altar and the chatty as sacred fane. Evening spread its holy stillness, bush and tree its magic felt, As the Gods in Brahma's mansions, exiles in their cottage dwelt, In the woods of Chttra-kuta where the Malyavati flows, Sixth day of their weary wand'rings ended in a sweet repose. VIII Tale of the Hermit's Son Wise Sumantra chariot-driver came from Ganga's sacred wave, And unto Ayodhya's monarch, banished Rama's message gave, Dasa-ratha's heart was shadowed by the deepening shade of night, As the darkness of the eclipse glooms the sun's meridian light ! On the sixth night, — when his Rama slept in Chitra-kuta's bower, — Memory of an ancient sorrow flung on him its fatal power, Of an ancient crime and anguish, unforgotten, dark and dread, Through the lapse of years and seasons casting back its death-like shade ! And the gloom of midnight deepened, Dasa-ratha sinking fast, To Kausalya sad and sorrowing spake his memories of the past : " Deeds we do in life, Kausalya, be they bitter, be they sweet, Bring their fruit and retribution, rich reward or suffering meet, THE DEATH OF THE KING 59 Heedless child is he, Kausalya, in his fate who doth not scan Retribution of his karma, sequence of a mighty plan ! Oft in madness and in folly we destroy the mango grove. Plant the gorgeous gay palasa for the red flower that we love, Fruitless as the red palasa is the karma I have sown, And my barren lifetime withers through the deed which is my own ! Listen to my tale, Kausalya, in my days of youth renowned, I was called a sabda-bcdki, archer prince who shot by sound, I could hit the unseen target, by the sound my aim could tell, — Blindly drinks a child the poison, blindly in my pride I fell ! I was then my father's Regent, thou a maid to me unknown, Hunting by the fair Sarayu in my car I drove alone, Buffalo or jungle tusker might frequent the river's brink, Nimble deer or watchful tiger stealing for his nightly drink, Stalking with a hunter's patience, loitering in the forests drear, Sound of something in the water struck my keen and listening ear, In the dark I stood and listened, some wild beast the water drunk, 'Tis some elephant, I pondered, lifting water with its trunk. I was called a sabda-bedhi, archer prince who shot by sound* On the unseen fancied tusker dealt a sure and deadly wound, Ah ! too deadly was my arrow and like hissing cobra fell, On my startled ear and bosom smote a voice of human wail, Dying voice of lamentation rose upon the midnight high, Till my weapons fell in tremor and a darkness dimmed my eye ! Hastening with a nameless terror soon I reached Sarayu' s shore, Saw a boy with hermit's tresses, and his pitcher lay before, Weltering in a pool of red blood, lying on a gory bed, Feebly raised his voice the hermit, and in dying accents said : 60 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA < What offence, O mighty monarch, all-unknowing have I done, That with quick and kingly justice slayest thus a hermit's son ? Old and feeble are my parents, sightless by the will of fate, Thirsty in their humble cottage for their duteous boy they wait, And thy shaft that kills me, monarch, bids my ancient parents die, Helpless, friendless, they will perish, in their anguish deep and high! Sacred lore and life-long penance change not mortal's earthly state, Wherefore else they sit unconscious when their son is doomed by fate, Or if conscious of my danger, could they dying breath recall, Can the tall tree save the sapling doomed by woodman's axe to fall? Hasten to my parents, monarch, soothe their sorrow and their ire, For the tears of good and righteous wither like the forest fire, Short the pathway to the asram, soon the cottage thou shalt see, Soothe their anger by entreaty, ask their grace and pardon free 1 But before thou goest, monarch, take, O take thy torturing dart, For it rankles.in my bosom with a cruel burning smart, And it eats into my young life as the river's rolling tide By the rains of summer swollen eats into its yielding side.' Writhing in his pain and anguish thus the wounded hermit cried, And I drtw the fatal arrow, and the holy hermit died ! Darkly fell the thickening shadows, stars their feeble radiance lent, As I filled the hermit's pitcher, to his sightless parents went, Darkly fell the moonless midnight, deeper gloom my bosom rent, As with faint and fait' ring footsteps to the hermits slow I went. Like two birds bereft of plumage, void of strength, deprived of flight, Were the stricken ancient hermits, friendless, helpless, void of sight, Lisping in thek feeble accents still they whispered of their child, Of the stainless hoy whose red blood Dasa-ratha's hands defiled ! / THE DEATH OF THE KING 61 And the father heard my footsteps, spake io accents soft and kind : 'Come, my son, to waiting parents, wherefore dost thou stay behind, Sporting in the rippling water didst thou midnight's hour beguile, But thy faint and thirsting mother anxious waits for thee the while, Hath my heedless word or. utterance caused thy boyish bosom smart, But a feeble father's failings may not wound thy filial heart, Help of helpless, sight of sightless, and thy parents' life and joy, Wherefore art thou mute and voiceless, speak, my brave and beauteous boy ! ' Thus the sightless father welcomed cruel slayer of his son, And an anguish tore my bosom for the action I had done, Scarce upon the sonless parents could I lift my aching eye, Scarce in faint and faltering accents to the father make reply, For a tremor shook my person and my spirit sank in dread, Straining all my utmost prowess, thus in quavering voice I said : « Not thy son, O holyiiermit, but a Kshatra warrior born, Dasa-ratha stands before thee by a cruel anguish torn, For. I came to slay the tusker by Sarayu's wooded brink, Buffalo or deer of jungle stealing for his midnight drink, And I heard a distant gurgle, some wild beast the water drunk, — So I thought, — some jungle tusker lifting water with its trunk, And I sent my fatal arrow on the unknown, unseen prey, Speeding to the spot I witnessed, — there a dying hermit lay ! From his pierced and quivering bosom then the cruel dart I drew, And he sorrowed for his parents as his spirit heavenward flew, Thus unconscious, holy father, I have slayed thy stainless son, Speak my penance, or in mercy pardon deed unknowing done ! ' 6a THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Slow and sadly by their bidding to the fatal spot I led, Long and loud bewailed the parents by the cold unconscious dead, And with hymns and holy water they performed the funeral rite, Then with tears that burnt and withered, spake the hermit in his might: ' Sorrow for a son beloved Is a father's (Brest woe, Sorrow for a son beloved, Dasa-ratha, thou shalt know I See the parents weep and perish, grieving for a slaughtered son. Thou shalt weep and thou shalt perish for a loved and righteous son ! Distant is the expiation, — but In fulness of the time, Dasa-ratha' s death In anguish cleanses Dasa-ratha9 s crime I * Spake the old and sightless prophet ; then he made the funeral pyre, And the father and the mother perished in the lighted fire, Years have gone and many seasons, and in fulness of the time, Comes the fruit of pride and folly and the harvest of my crime ! Rama eldest born and dearest, Lakshman true and faithful son, Ah ! forgive a dying father and a cruel action done, Queen Kaikeyi, thou hast heedless brought on Raghu's race this stain, Banished are the guiltless children and thy lord and king is slain ! Lay thy hands on mine, Kausalya, wipe thy unavailing tear, Speak a
