With his darts like shooting sunbeams cleft each arrow as it came. Bleeding from the darts of Lakshman, pale with anger, wounded sore, Ravan drew at last his Suits, gift of Gods in days of yore, Javelin of flaming splendour, deadly like the shaft of Fate, Ravan hurled on dauntless Lakshman in his fierce and furious hate. Vain were Lakshman's human weapons aimed with skill directed well, Pierced by Suits, gallant Lakshman in his red blood fainting fell, Wrathful Rama saw the combat and arose in godlike might, Bleeding Ravan turned to Lanka, sought his safety in his flight. THE WAR IN CEYLON 145 IV Fall of Kumbha-karna Once more healed and strong and valiant, Lakshman in his arms arose, Safe behind the gates of Lanka humbled Ravan shunned his foes, Till the stalwart Kumbha-karna from his wonted slumbers woke, Mightiest he of all the Rakshas; — Ravan thus unto him spoke : " Thou alone, O Kumbha-karna, can the Raksha's honour save, Strongest of the Raksha warriors, stoutest-hearted midst the brave, Speed thee like the Dread Destroyer to the dark and dubious fray, Cleave through Rama's girdling forces, chase the scattered foe away ! " Like a mountain's beetling turret Kumbha-karna stout and tall, Passed the city's lofty portals and the city's girdling wall, And he raised his voice in battle, sent his cry from shore to shore, Solid mountains shook and trembled and the sea returned the roar ! Indra nor the great Varuna equalled Kumbha-karna' s might, Vanars trembled at the warrior, sought their safety in their flight, But the prince of fair Kishkindha, Angad chief of warlike fame, Marked his panic-stricken forces with a princely warrior's shame. " Whither fly, ye trembling Vanars ? " thus the angry chieftain cried, " All forgetful of your duty, of your worth and warlike pride, Deem not stalwart Kumbha-karna is our match in open fight, Forward let us meet in battle, let us crush his giant might ! " Rallied thus, the broken army stone and tree and massive rock, Hurled upon the giant Raksha speeding with the lightning's shock, i46 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Vain each flying rock and missile, vain each stout and sturdy stroke, On the Raksha's limbs of iron stone and tree in splinters broke. Dashing through die scattered forces Kumbha-karna fearless stood, As a forest conflagration feasts upon the parched wood, Far as confines of the ocean, to the causeway they had made, To the woods or caves or billows, Vanars in their terror fled ! Hanuman of dauntless valour turned not in his fear nor fled, Heaved a rock with mighty effort on the Raksha's towering head, With his spear-head Kumbha-karna dashed the flying rock aside, By the Raksha's weapon stricken Hanuman fell in his pride. Next Rishabha and brave Nila and the bold Sarabha came, Gavaksha and Gandha-madan, chieftains of a deathless fame, But the spear of Kumbha-karna hurled to earth his feeble foes, Dreadful was the field of carnage, loud the cry of battle rose ! Angad prince of fair Kishkindha, filled with anger and with shame, Tore a rock with wrathful prowess, to the fatal combat came, Short the combat, soon the Raksha caught and turned his foe around, Hurled him in his deathful fury, bleeding, senseless on the ground ! Last, Sugriva king of Vanars with a vengeful anger woke, Tore a rock from bed of mountain and in proud defiance spoke, Vain Sugriva's toil and struggle, Kumbha-karna hurled a rock, Fell Sugriva crushed and senseless 'neath the missile's mighty shock ! Piercing through the Vanar forces, like a flame through forest wood, Came the Raksha where in glory Lakshman calm and fearless stood, Short their contest, — Kumbha-karna sought a greater, mightier foe, To the young and dauntless Lakshman spake in accents soft and low : "Dauntless prince^ and matchless warrior, fair Sumitra's gallant son, Thou hast proved unrivalled prowess and unending glory won, THE WAR IN CEYLON 147 But I seek a mightier foeman, to thy elder let me go, I would fight the royal Rama, or to die or slay my foe ! " " Victor proud 7 " said gallant Lakshman, "peerless in thy giant might. Conqueror of great Immortals, Lakshman owns thy skill in fight, Mightier foe than bright Immortals thou shalt meet in fatal war, Death for thee in guise of Rama tarries yonder, not afar I " 111 it fared with Kumbha-karna when he strove with Rama's might, Men on earth nor Gods immortal conquered Rama in the fight, Deadly arrows keen and flaming from the hero's weapon broke, Kumbha-karna faint and bleeding felt his death at every stroke, Last, an arrow pierced his armour, from his shoulders smote his head, Kumbha-karna, lifeless, headless, rolled upon the gory bed, Hurled unto the heaving ocean Kumbha-karna' s body fell, And as shaken by a tempest, mighty was the ocean's swell ! Indrajit's Sacrifice and Second Battle Still around beleaguered Lanka girdled Rama's living chain, Raksha chieftain after chieftain strove to break the line in vain, Sons of Ravan,— brave Narantak was by valiant Angad slain, Trisiras and fierce Devantak, Hanuman slew on the plain, Atikaya, tall of stature, was by gallant Lakshman killed, Ravan wept for slaughtered princes, brave in war in weapons skilled. " Shed no tears of sorrow, father ! " Indrajit exclaimed in pride, " While thy eldest son surviveth triumph dwells on Ravan's side, Rama and that stripling Lakshman, I had left them in their gore, Once again I seek their lifeblood, — they shall live to fight no more. i48 THE EPIC OP RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Hear my vow, O Lord of Rakshas ! ere descends yon radiant sun, Rama's days and gallant Lakshman's on this wide earth shall be done, Witness Indra and Vivaswat, Vishnu great and Rudra dire, Witness Sun and Moon and Sadhyas, and the living God of Fire I " Opened wide the gates of Lanka ; in the spacious field of war, I nd raj it arranged his army, foot and horse and battle car, Then with gifts and sacred mantras bent before the God of Fire, And invoked celestial succour in the battle dread and dire. With his offerings and his garlands, Indrajit with spices rare. Worshipped holy Vaiswa-nara on the altar bright and fair, Spear and mace were ranged in order, dart and bow and shining blade, Sacred fuel, blood-red garments, fragrant flowers were duly laid, Head of goat as black as midnight offered then the warrior brave, And the shooting tongue of red fire omens of a conquest gave, Curling to the right and smokeless, red and bright as molten gold, Tongue of flame received the offering of the hero true and bold ! Victory the sign betokens ! Bow and dart and shining blade, Sanctified by holy mantras, by the Fire the warrior laid, Then with weapons consecrated, hid in mists as once before, Indrajit on helpless foemen did his fatal arrows pour ! Fled the countless Vanar forces, panic-stricken, crushed and slain, And the dead and dying warriors strewed the gory battle plain, Then on Rama, and on Lakshman, from his dark and misty shroud, Indrajit discharged his arrows bright as sunbeams through a cloud. Scanning earth and bright sky vainly for his dark and hidden foe, Ra na to his brother Lakshman spake in grief and spake in woe : " Once again that wily Raksha, slaying all our Vanar train, From his dark and shadowy shelter doth on us his arrows rain, THE WAR IN CEYLON 149 By the grace of great Swayambhu, Indrajit is lost to sight, Useless is our human weapon 'gainst his gift of magic might, If Swayambhu wills it, Lakshman, we shall face these fatal darts, We shall stand with dauntless patience, we shall die with dauntless hearts ! " Weaponless but calm and valiant, from the fbeman's dart and spell Patiently the princes suffered, fearlessly the heroes fell ! VI Indrajit's Third Battle and Fall Healing herbs from distant mountains Hanuman in safety brought, Rama rose and gallant Lakshman, once again their foemen sought, And when night its sable mantle o'er the earth and ocean drew, Forcing through the gates of Lanka to the frightened city flew ! Gallant sons of Kumbha- karna vainly fought to stem the tide, Hanuman and brave Sugriva slew the brothers in their pride, Makaraksha, shark-eyed warrior, vainly struggled with the foe, Rama laid him pierced and lifeless by an arrow from his bow. Indrajit arose in anger for his gallant kinsmen slaved, In his arts and deep devices Sita's beauteous image made, And he placed the form of beauty on his speeding battle car, With his sword he smote the image in the gory field of war ! Rama heard the fatal message which his faithful Vanars gave, And a deathlike trance and tremor fell upon the warrior brave, But Bibhishan deep in wisdom to the anguished Rama came, With his words of consolation spake of Rama's righteous dame : ISO THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " Trust me, Rama, trust thy comrade, — for I know our wily house, — Indrajit slays not the woman whom his father seeks as spouse, 'Tis for Sita, impious R?van meets thee on the battle-field. Stakes his life and throne and empire, but thy Sita will not yield, Deem not that the king of Rakshas will permit her blood be shed, Indrajit slays not the woman whom hi8 father seeks to wed ! 'Twas an image of thy Sita, Indrajit hath cleft in twain, While our army wails and sorrows, — he performs his rites again, To the holy Nikumbhila, Indrajit in secret hies, For the rites which yield him prowess, hide him in the cloudy skies. Let young Lakshman seek the fbeman ere his magic rites be done, — Once the sacrifice completed, none can combat Ravan's son, — Let young Lakshman speed through Lanka till his wily foe is found, Slay the secret sacrificer on the sacrificial ground ! " Unto holy Nikumbhila, Lakshman with Bibhishan went, Bravest, choicest of the army, Rama with his brother sent, Magic rites and sacrifices Indrajit had scarce begun, When surprised by arm&l foemen rose in anger Ravan's son ! " Art thou he," thus to Bibhishan, Indrajit in anger spake, " Brother of my royal father, stealing thus my life to take, Raksha, born of Raksha parents, dost thou glory in this deed, Traitor to thy king and kinsmen, false to us in direst need ? Scorn and pity fill my bosom thus to see thee leave thy kin, Serving as a slave of foemen, stooping to a deed of sin, For the slave who leaves his kindred, basely seeks the foeman's grace, .Meets destruction from the foeman after he destroys his race ! " " Untaught child of impure passions," thus Bibhishan answer made, " Of my righteous worth unconscious bitter accents hast thou said, THE WAR IN CEYLON 151 Know, proud youth, that Truth and Virtue inmy heart precedence take, And we shun the impious kinsman as we shun the pois'nous snake ! Listen youth / this earth no longer bears thy father's sin and strife, Plunder of the righteous neighbour, passion for the neighbour's wife, Earth and skies have doomed thy father for his sin-polluted reign, Unto Gods his proud defiance and his wrongs to sons of men ! Listen more ! this fated Lanka groans beneath her load of crime, And shall perish in her folly by the ruthless hand of Tim?, Thou shalt perish and thy father and this proud presumptuous state, Lakshman meets thee, impious Raksha, by the stern decree of Fate I " " Hast thou too forgot the lesson/' Indrajit to Lakshman said, " Twice in field of war unconscious thee with Rama have I laid, Dost thou stealing like a serpent brave ray yet unconquered might, Perish, boy, in thy presumption, in this last and fatal fight ! " Spake the hero : " Like a coward hid beneath a mantling cloud, Thou hast battled like a caitiff safe behind thy sheltering shroud, Now I seek an open combat, time is none to prate or speak, Boastful word is coward's weapon, weapons and thy arrows seek ! " Soon they mixed in dubious combat, fury fired each foe man's heart, Either warrior felt his rival worthy of his bow and dart, Lakshman with his hurtling arrows pierced the Raksha's golden mail, Shattered by the Raksha's weapons Lakshman's useless armour fell, Red with gore and dim in eyesight still the chiefs in fury fought, Neither quailed before his foeman, pause nor grace nor mercy sought, Till with more than human valour Lakshman drew his bow amain, Slayed the Raksha's steeds and driver, severed too his bow in twain. 152 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " If the great and godlike Rama is in faith and duty true, God* assist the cause of virtue ! " — Lakshman uttered as he drew, Fatal was the dart unerring, — Gods assist the true and bold, — On the field of Nikumbhila, Lakshman'* foeman headless rolled ! VII Ravan's Lament "Quenched the light of Rakshas' valour! " so the message-bearer said, " Lakshman with the deep Bibhishan hath thy son in battle slaved, , Fallen is our prince and hero and his day on earth is done, i In a brighter world, O monarch, lives thy brave thy gallant son ! " Anguish filled the father's bosom and his fleeting senses failed, Till to deeper sorrow wakened Lanka's monarch wept and walled : " Greatest of my gallant warriors, dearest to thy father's heart, Victor over bright Immortals, — art thou slain by Lakshman's dart, Noble prince whose peerless arrows could the peaks of Mandar stain, And could daunt the Dread Destroyer, — art thou by a mortal slain ? But thy valour lends a radiance to elysium's sunny clime, And thy bright name adds a lustre to the glorious rolls of time, In the skies the bright Immortals lisp thy name with terror pale, On the earth our maids and matrons mourn thy fall with piercing wail ! Hark ! the voice of lamentation waking in the palace halls, Like the voice of woe in forests when the forest monarch falls, Hark ! the wailing widowed princess, mother weeping for her son, Leaving them in tears and anguish, Indrajit, where art thou gone? Full of years, — so oft I pondered, — when the monarch Ravan dies, Indrajit shall watch his bedside, Indrajit shall close his eyes, THE WAR
