my father's heart, Hath my unknown crime or folly caused his ancient bosom smart ? Ever dear is Queen Kaikeyi to her consort and her king, Hath 8,ome angry accent escaped thee thus his royal heart to wring, Speak, my ever -loving mother, speak the truth for thou must know, What distress or deep disaster pains his heart and clouds his brow ? " " Mother's love nor woman's pity moved the deep-determined queen, As in cold and cruel accents thus she spake her purpose keen : " Grief nor woe nor sudden ailment pains thy father loved of old, But he fears to speak his purpose to his Rama true and bold, And his loving accents falter some unloving wish to tell, Till you give your princely promise, you will serve his mandate well > Listen more, in bygone seasons, — Rama thou wert then unborn, — I had saved thy royal father, he a gracious boon had sworn, But his feeble heart repenting is by pride and passion stirred, He would break his royal promise as a caitiff breaks his word, Years have passed and now the monarch would his ancient word forego, He would build a needless causeway when the waters ceased to flow ! Truth inspires each deed attempted and each word by monarchs spoke, Not for thee, though loved and honoured, should a royal vow be broke, If the true and righteous Rama binds him by his father's vow, I will tell thee of the anguish which obscures his royal brow, THE BANISHMENT 37 If thy feeble bosom falter and thy halting purpose fail, Unredeemed is royal promise and unspoken is my tale ! " " Speak thy word," exclaimed the hero, "and my purpose shall not fail, Rama serves his father's mandate and his bosom shall not quail, Poisoned cup or death untimely, — what the cruel fates decree, — To his king and to bis father Rama yields obedience free, Speak my father's royal promise, hold me by his promise tied, Rama speaks and shall not palter, for his lips have never lied." Cold and clear Kaikeyi's accents fell as falls the hunter's knife, ; " Listen then to word of promise and redeem it with thy life, Wounded erst by foes immortal, saved by Queen Kaikeyi's car?, Two great boons your father plighted and his royal words were fair, I have sought their due fulfilment, — brightly shines my Bharat'sstar, — Bharat shall be Heir and Regent, Rama shall be banished far ! If thy father' s royal mandate thou wouldst list and honour still, Fourteen years in Dandak }s forest live and wander- at thy will. Seven long years and seven, my Rama, thou shalt in the jungle dwell, Bark of trees shall be thy raiment and thy home the hermit's cell, Over fair Kosala's empire let my princely Bharat reign, With his cars and steeds and tusker sx 'wealth and gold and armed men ! Tender-hearted is the monarch, age and sorrow dim his eye, And the anguish of a father checks his speech and purpose high, For the love he bears thee, Rama, cruel vow he may not speak* I have spoke his will and mandate, and thy true obedience seek." Calmly Rama heard the mandate, grief nor anger touched his heart, \ Calmly from his father's empire and his home prepared to part* / BOOK III DASA-RATHA-VIYOGA (The Death of the King) '"PHE first six days of Rama's wanderings are narrated in this Book. Sita and the faithful Lakshrnan accompanied Rama in his exile, and the loyal people of Ayodhya followed their exiled prince as far as the basks of the Tamasa river where they halted on the first night. Rama had to steal away at night to escape the citizens, and his wanderings during the following days give us beauti- ful glimpses of forest life in holy hermitages. Thirty centuries have passed since the age of the Kosafas and Videhas, but every step of the supposed journey of Rama is well known in India to this day, and is annually traversed by thousands of devoted pilgrims. The past is not dead and buried in India, it lives in the hearts of millions of faithful men and faithful women, and shall live for ever. On the third day of their exile, Rama and his wife and brother crossed the Ganges ; on the fourth day they came to the hermitage of Bharad-vaja, which stood where Allahabad now stands, on the confluence of the Ganges and the Jumna ; on the fifth day they crossed the Jumna, the southern shores of which were then covered with woods ; and on the sixth day they came to the hill of Chitra- kuta, where they met the saint Valmifci, the reputed author of this Epic. " We have often looked," says a writer in Calcutta Review, vol. xxii, " on that green hill : it is the holiest spot of that sect of the Hindu faith who devote themselves to this incarnation of Vishnu. The whole neighbourhood is Rama's country, Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his name, some of the wild fruits are still called Sita-phal, being the reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit the spot, and round THE DEATH OF THE KING 39 the hill is raised a footpath on which the devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe." Grief for the banished Rama pressed on the ancient heart of X3asa-ratha. The feeble old king pined away and died, remember- ing and recounting on his death-bed how in his youth he had caused sorrow and death to an old hermit by killing his son* Scarcely any passage in the Epic is more touching than this old sad story told by the dying monarch. The portions translated in this Book form the whole or the main portions of Sections xxvi., xxvii., xxxi., xxxix., xl.» xlvi., lit, liv., It., lvi., lxiii., and lxiv. of Book ii. of the original text. I Woman's Love " Dearly loved, devoted Sita ! daughter of a royal line, Part we now, for years of wand'ri'ng in the pathless woods is mine, For my father, promise-fettered, to Kaikeyi yields the sway, And she wills her son anointed, — fourteen years doth Rama stray, I But before I leave thee, Sita, in the wilderness to rove, Yield me one more tender token of thy true and trustful love ! J Serve my crowned brother, Sita, as a faithful, duteous dame, j Tell him not of Rama's virtues, tell him not of Rama's claim, Since my royal father willeth,-~Bharat shall be regent«heir, Serve him with a loyal duty, serve him with obeisance fair, Since my royal father willeth, — years of banishment be mine, Brave in sorrow and in suffering, woman's brightest fame be thine ! Keep thy fasts and vigils, Sita, while thy Rama is away, Faith in Gods and faith in virtue on thy bosom hold their sway, 40 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA In the early watch of morning to the Gods for blessings pray. To my father Dasa-ratha honour and obeisance pay, To my mother, Queen Kausalya, is thy dearest tendance due, Offer her thy consolation, be a daughter fond and true ! Queen Kaikeyi and Sumitra equal love and honour claim, With a soothing soft endearment sweetly serve each royal dame, Cherish Bharat and Satrughna with a sister's watchful love, And a mother's true affection and a mother's kindness prove ! Listen, Sita, unto Bharat speak no heedless angry word, He is monarch of Kosala and of Raghu's race is lord, Crowned kings our willing service and our faithful duty own, Dearest sons they disinherit, cherish strangers near the throne ! Bharat's will with deep devotion and with faultless faith obey, Truth and virtue on thy bosom ever hold their gentle sway, And to please each dear relation, gentle Sita, be it thine, Part we love ! for years of wand' ring in the pathless woods is mine ! " Rama spake, and soft-eyed Sita, ever sweet in speech and word, Stirred by loving woman's passion boldly answered thus her lord : " Do I hear my husband rightly, are these words my Rama spake, And her banished lord and husband will the wedded wife forsake ? Lightly I dismiss the counsel which my lord hath lightly said, For it ill beseems a warrior and my husband's princely grade ! For the faithful woman follows where her wedded lord may lead, In the banishment of Rama, Sita's exile is decreed, Sire nor son nor loving brother rules the wedded woman's state, With her lord she falls or rises, with her consort courts her fate, If the righteous son of Raghu wends to forests dark and drearx Sita steps before her husband wild and thorny paths to clear / THE DEATH OF THE KING 41 Like the tasted refuse water cast thy timid thoughts aside. Take me to the pathless jungle, bid me by my lord abide, Car and steed and gilded palace, vain are these to woman's life, Dearer is her husband's shadow to the loved and loving wife ! For my mother often taught me and my father often spake, That her home the wedded woman doth beside her husband make, As the shadow to the substance, to her lord is faithful wife, And she parts not from her consort till she parts with fleeting life ! Therefore bid me seek the jungle and in pathless forests roam, Where the wild deer freely ranges and the tiger makes his home, Happier than in father's mansions in the woods will Sita rove, Waste no thought on home or kindred, nestling in her husband's love ! World-renowned is Rama's valour, fearless by her Rama's side, Sita still will live and wander with a faithful woman's pride, And the wild fruit she will gather from the fresh and fragrant wood, And the food by Rama tasted shall be Sita's cherished food ! Bid me seek the sylvan greenwoods, wooded hills and plateaus high, Limpid rills and crystal nullas as they softly ripple by, And where in the lake of lotus tuneful ducks their plumage lave, Let me with my loving Rama skim the cool translucent wave ! Years will pass in happy union, — happiest lot to woman given, — Sita seeks not throne or empire, nor the brighter joys of heaven, Heaven conceals not brighter mansions in its sunny fields of pride, Where without her lord and husband faithful Sita would reside ! Therefore let me seek the jungle where the jungle-rangers rove, Dearer than the royal palace, where I share my husband's love, 44 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA " Part we then from loving kinsmen, arms and mighty weapons bring, Bows of war which Lord Varuna rendered to Videha's king, Coats of mail to sword impervious, quivers which can never fail. And the rapiers bright as sunshine, golden* hiked, tempered well, Safely rest these goodly weapons in our great preceptor's hall, Seek and bring them, faithful brother, for methinks we need them all ! " Rama spake ; his valiant brother then the wondrous weapons brought, Wreathed with fresh and fragrant garlands and with gold and jewels wrought, " Welcome, brother," uttered Rama, "stronger thus to woods we go, Wealth and gold and useless treasure to the holy priests bestow, To the son of saint Vasishtha, to each sage is honour due, Then we leave our father's mansions, to our father's mandate true ! " III Mother's Blessings Tears of sorrow and of suffering flowed from Queen Kausalya's eye, As she saw departing Sita for her blessings drawing nigh, And she clasped the gentle Sita and she kissed her moistened head, And her tears like summer tempest choked the loving words she said : "Part we, dear devoted daughter, to thy husband ever true, With a woman's whole affection render love to husband'sxroe-l False are women loved and cherished, gentle in their speech and word, When misfortune's shadows gather, who are faithless to their lord, Who through years of sunny splendour smile and pass the livelong day, When misfortune's darkness thickens, from their husband turn away, j THE DEATH OF THE KING 45 Who with changeful fortune changing oft ignore the plighted word, And forget a woman's duty, woman's faith to wedded lord, Who to holy love inconstant from their wedded consort part, Manly deed nor manly virtue wins the changeful woman's heart ! But the true and righteous woman, loving spouse and changeless wife, Faithful to her lord and consort holds him dearer than her life, Ever true and righteous Sita, follow still my godlike son, Like a God to thee is Rama in the woods or on the throne ! " " I shall do my duty, mother," said the wife with wifely pride, " Like a God to me is Rama, Sita shall not leave his side, From the Moon will part his lustre ere I part from wedded lord, Ere from faithful wife's devotion falter in my deed or word, For the stringless lute is silent, idle is the wheel-less car, And no wife the loveless consort, inauspicious is her star ! Small the measure of affection which the sire and brother prove, Measureless to wedded woman is her lord and husband's love, True to Law and true to Scriptures, true to woman's plighted word, Can I ever be, my mother, faithless, loveless to my lord ? " Tears of joy and mingled sorrow filled the Queen Kausalya's eye, As she marked the faithful Sita true in heart, in virtue high, And she wept the tears of sadness when with sweet obeisance due, Spake with hands in meekness folded Rama ever good and true : " Sorrow not, my loving mother, trust in virtue's changeless beam, Swift will fly the years of exile like a brief and transient dream, Girt by faithful friends and forces, blest by rfghteous Gods above, Thou shalt see thy son returning to thy bosom and thy love ! " 46 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Unto ail the royal ladies Rama his obeisance paid, For his failings unremembered, blessings and forgiveness prayed, And his words were soft and gentle, and they wept to see him go, Like the piercing cry of curlew rose the piercing voice of woe, And in halls where drum and tabor rose in joy and regal pride, , Voice of grief and lamentation sounded far and sounded wide ! « Then the true and faithful Lakshman parted from
