the kings qf men, Mansions meet for prince and chieftain to his guests the monarch gave, Gracious as the Lord of Creatures held the gathering rich and brave! Nathless to Kosala's Council nor Videha's monarch came, Nor the warlike chief Kaikeya, Aswa-pati king of fame, To those kings and near relations, ancient Dasa-ratha meant, Message of the proud anointment with his greetings would be sent. Brightly dawned the day of gathering ; in the lofty Council Hall Stately chiefs and ancient burghers came and mustered one and all, And each prince and peer was seated on his cushion rich and high, And on monarch Dasa-ratha eager turned his anxious eye, Girt by crowned kings and chieftains, burghers from the town and plain, Dasa-ratha shone like Indra girt by heaven's immortal train! 20 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA II The People Consulted With the voice of pealing thunder Dasa-ratha spake to all, To the princes and the burghers gathered in Ayodhya's hall : " Known to all, the race of Raghu rules this empire broad and fair, And hath ever loved and cherished subjects with a father's care, In my fathers' footsteps treading I have sought the ancient path, Nursed my people as my children, free from passion, pride and wrath, Underneath this white umbrella, seated on this royal throne, I have toiled to win their welfare and my task is almost done ! Years have passed of fruitful labour, years of work by fortune blest, And the evening of my life-time needs, my friends, the evening's rest, Years have passed in watchful effort, Law and Duty to uphold, Effort needing strength and prowess, — and my feeble limbs are old ! Peers and burghers, let your monarch, now his lifelong labour done, For the weal of loving subjects on his empire seat his son, iNDRA-like in peerless valour, risbi-like in holy lore, Rama follows Dasa-ratha, but in virtues stands before ! Throned in Pushya's constellation shines the moon with fuller light, Throned to rule his father's empire Rama wins a loftier might, He will be your gracious monarch favoured well by Fortune's Queen, By his virtues and his valour lord of earth he might have been ! Speak your thought and from this bosom lift a load of toil and care, On the proud throne of my fathers let me place a peerless heir, THE BANISHMENT. 21 Speak your thought, my chiefs and people, if this purpose please you wel 1 , Or if wiser, better counsel in your wisdom ye can tell, Speak your thought without compulsion, though this plan to me be dear, If some middle course were wiser, if some other way were clear ! " Gathered chieftains hailed the mandate with applauses Long and loud, As the peafowls hail the thunder of the dark and laden cloud, And the gathered subjects echoed loud and long the welcome sound, Till the voices of the people shook the sky and solid ground ! Brahmans versed in laws of duty, chieftains in their warlike pride, Countless men from town and hamlet heard the mandate far and wide, And they met in consultation, joyously with one accord, Freely and in measured accents, gave their answer to their lord : " Years of toil and watchful labour weigh upon thee, king of men, Young in years is righteous Rama, Heir and Regent let him reign, We would see the princely Rama, Heir. and Regent duly made, Riding on the royal tusker in the white umbrella's shade ! " Searching still their secret purpose, seeking still their thought to know, Spake again the ancient monarch in his measured words and slow: " I would know your inner feelings, loyal thoughts and whispers kind, For a doubt within me lingers and a shadow clouds my mind, True to Law and true to Duty while I rule this kingdom fair, Wherefore would you see my Rama seated as the Regent Heir ? " « We would see him Heir and Regent, Dasa-ratha, ancient lord, For his heart is blessed with valour, virtue marks his deed and Word, Lives not man in all the wide-earth who excels tjhe stainless youth, In his loyalty to Duty, in his love of righteous Truth, '22 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA ! Truth impels his thought and action, Truth inspires his soul with grace, And his virtue fills the wide earth and exalts his ancient race ! Bright Immortals know his valour ; with his brother Lakshman bold He hath never failed to conquer hostile town or castled hold, And returning from his battles, from the duties of the war, Riding on his royal tusker or his all-resistless car, As a father to his children to his loving men he came, Blessed our homes and maids and matrons till our infants lisped his name, For our humble woes and troubles Rama hath the ready tear, To our humble tales of suffering Rama lends his willing ear ! Happy is the royal father who hath such a righteous son, For in town and mart and hamlet every heart hath Rama won, Burghers and the toiling tillers tales of Rama's kindness say, Man and infant, maid and matron, morn and eve for Rama pray, To the Gods and bright Immortals we our inmost wishes send, May the good and godlike Rama on his father's throne ascend, Great in gifts and great in glory, Rama doth our homage own, We would see the princely Rama seated on his father's throne ! " III The City Decorated With his consort pious Rama, pure in deed and pure in thought, After evening's due ablutions Narayana's chamber sought, Prayed unto the Lord of Creatures, Narayana Ancient Sire, Placed his offering on his forehead, poured it on the lighted fire, THE BANISHMENT 23 Piously partook the remnant, sought for Narayana's aid, As he kept his fast and vigils on the grass of kusa spread. With her lord the saintly Sita silent passed the sacred night, Contemplating World's Preserver, Lord of Heaven's ethereal height, And within the sacred chamber on the grass of tusa lay, Till the crimson streaks of morning ushered in the festive day, Till the royal bards and minstrels chanted forth the morning call, Pealing through the holy chamber, echoing through the royal hall. Past the night of sacred vigils, in his silken robes arrayed, Message of the proud anointment Rama to the Brahmans said, And the Brahmans spake to burghers that the festive day was come, Till the mart and crowded pathway rang with note of pipe and drum, And the townsmen heard rejoicing of the vigils of the night, Kept by Rama and by Sita for the day's auspicious rite. Rama shall be Heir and Regent, Rama shall be crowned to-day, — Rapid flew the gladdening message with the morning's gladsome ray, And the people of the city, maid and matron, man and boy, Decorated fair Ayodhya in their wild tumultuous joy ! On the temple' 8 lofty steeple high as cloud above the air, On the crossing of the pathways, in the garden green and fair, On the merchant' 8 ample warehouse, on the shop with stores displayed, On the mansion of the noble by the cunning artist made, On the gay and bright pavilion, on the high and shady trees, Banners rose and glittering streamers, flags that fluttered in the breeze ! Actors gay and nimble dancers, singers skilled in lightsome song; With their antics and their music pleased the gay and gathered throng, And the people met in conclaves, spake of Rama, Regent Heir, And the children by the road-side lisped of Rama brave and fair ! 24 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Women wove the scented garland, merry maids the censer lit, Men with broom and sprinkled water swept the spacious mart and street, Rows of trees and posts they planted hung with lamps for coming night, That the midnight dark might rival splendour of the noonday light ! Troops of men and merry children laboured with a loving care, Woman's skill and woman's fancy made the city passing fair, So that good and kindly Rama might his people's toil approve, So that sweet and soft-eyed Ska might accept her people's love ! Groups of joyous townsmen gathered in the square or lofty hall, Praised the monarch Dasa-ratha, regent Rama young and tall : " Great and good is Dasa-ratha born of Raghu's royal race, In the fulness of his lifetime on his son he grants his grace, And we hail the rite auspicious for our prince of peerless might, He will guard us by his valour, he will save our cherished right, Dear unto his loving brothers in his father's palace hall, As is Rama to his brothers dear is Rama to us all, Long live ancient Dasa-ratha king of Raghu's royal race, We shall see his son anointed by his father's righteous grace ! " Thus of Rama's consecration spake the burghers one and all, And the men from distant hamlets poured within the city wall, From the confines of the empire, north and south and west and east, ' Came to see the consecration and to share the royal feast ! And the rolling tide of nations raised their voices loud and high, Like the tide of sounding ocean when the full moon lights the sky, And Ayodhya thronged by people from the hamlet, mart and lea, Was tumultuous like the ocean thronged by creatures of the sea ! THE BANISHMENT 25 IV Intrigue In the inner palace chamber stood the proud and peerless queen, With a mother's joy Kaikeyi gaily watched the festive scene, But with deep and deadly hatred Manthara, her nurse and maid, Marked the city bright with banners, and in scornful accents said : " Take thy presents back, Kaikeyi, for they ill befit the day, And when clouds of sorrow darken, ill beseems thee to be gay, And thy folly moves my laughter though an anguish wakes my sigh, For a gladness stirs thy bosom when thy greatest woe is nigh ! . Who that hath a woman's wisdom, who that is a prudent wife, Smiles in joy when prouder rival triumphs in the race of life, How can hapless Queen Kaikeyi greet this deed of darkness done, When the favoured Queen Kausalya wins the empire for her son ? Know the truth, O witless woman ! Bharat is unmatched in fame, Rama, deep and darkly jealous, dreads thy Bharat' 8 rival claim, Younger Lakshman with devotion doth on eldest Rama wait, Young Satrughna with affection follows Bharat's lofty fate, Rama dreads no rising danger from the twins, the youngest-born, But thy Bharat' 8 claims and virtues fill his jealous heart with scorn ! Trust me, queen, thy Bharat's merits are too well and widely known, And he stands too near and closely by a rival brother's throne, Rama hath a wolf-like wisdom and a fang to reach the foe, And I tremble for thy Bharat, Heaven avert untimely woe ! Happy is the Queen Kausalya, they will soon anoint her son, When on Pushy a' a constellation gaily rides to-morrow's moon, 26 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Happy is the Queen Kausalya in her regal pomp and state, And Kaikeyi like a bond-slave must upon her rival wait ! Wilt thou do her due obeisance as we humble' women do, Will thy proud and princely Bharat as his brother's henchman go, Will thy Bharat' 8 gentle consort, fairest princess in this land, In her tears and in her anguish wait on Site's proud command ? " With a woman's scornful anger Manthara proclaimed her grief, With a mother's love for Rama thus Kaikeyi answered brief: " What inspires thee, wicked woman, thus to rail in bitter tone, Shall not Rama, best and eldest, fill his father's royal throne, What alarms thee, crooked woman, in the happy rites begun, Shall not Rama guard his brothers as a father guards his son ? And when Rama's reign is over, shall not Gods my Bharat speed, And by law and ancient custom shall not younger son succeed, In the present bliss of Rama and in Bharat' s future hope, What offends thee, senseless woman, wherefore dost thou idly mope ? Dear is Rama as my Bharat, ever duteous in his ways, Rama honours Queen Kausalya, loftier honour to me pays, Rama's realm is Bharat' 8 kingdom, ruling partners they shall prove, For himself than for his brothers Rama owns no deeper love ! " Scorn and anger shook her person and her bosom heaved a sigh, As in wilder, fiercer accents Manthara thus made reply : " What insensate rage-or madness clouds thy heart and blinds thine eye, Courting thus thy own disaster, courting danger dread and high, What dark folly clouds thy vision to the workings of thy foe, Heedless thus to seek destruction and to sink in gulf of woe ? Know, fair queen, by law and custom, son ascends the throne of pride, Rama's son succeedeth Rama, luckless Bharat steps aside, THE BANISHMENT 27 Brothers do not share a kingdom, nor can one by one succeed, Mighty were the civil discord if such custom were decreed ! For to stop all war and tumult, thus the ancient laws ordain, Eldest son succeeds his father, younger children may not reign, Bharat barred from Rama's empire, vainly decked with royal grace, Friendless, joyless, long shall wander, alien from his land and race ! Thou hast borne the princely Bharat, nursed him from thy gentle breast, To a queen and to a mother need a prince's claims be pressed, To a thoughtless heedless mother must I Bharat's virtues plead, Must the Queen Kaikeyi witness Queen Kauaalaya's son succeed ? Trust thy old and faithful woman who hath nursed thee, youthful queen, And in great and princely houses many darksome deeds hath seen, Trust my word, the wily Rama for his spacious empire's good, Soon will banish friendless Bharat and secure his peace with blood ! Thou hast sent the righteous Bharat to thy ancient father's land, And Satrughna young and valiant doth beside his brother stand, Young in years and generous-hearted, they will grow in mutual love, As the love of elder Rama doth in Lakshman's bosom move. Young companions grow in friendship, and our ancient legends tell, Weeds protect a forest monarch which the woodman's axe would fell, Crowned Rama unto. Lakshman will a loving brother prove, But for Bharat and Satrughna, Rama's bosom owns no love, And a danger thus ariseth if the elder wins the throne,
