in he palace of Ravan. Rama gave way to the opinion of his people, ind he sent away his loving and faithful Sita to live in forests once Bore. Sita found an asylum in the hermitage of Valmiki, the reputed iuthor of this Epic, and there gave birth to twins, Lava and Kusa. fear 8 passed on, and Lava and Kusa grew up as hermit boys, and is pupils of Valmiki. After years had passed, Rama performed a great Horse-sacrifice, tings and princes were invited from neighbouring countries, and a great feast was held. Valmiki came to the sacrifice, and his pupils, Lava and Kusa, chanted there the great Epic, the Ramayana, (escribing the deeds of Rama. In this interesting portion of the Cem we find how songs and poetry were handed down in cient India by memory. The boys had learnt the whole of he Epic by heart, and chanted portions of it, day after day, till he recital was completed. We are told that the poem consists of even books, 500 cantos, and 24,000 couplets. Twenty cantos frere recited each day, so that the recital of the whole poem must lave taken twenty-five days. It was by such feats of memory and >y such recitals that literature was preserved in ancient times in India. 172 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Rama recognised his sons in the boy-minstrels, and his heart yearned once more for Sita whom he had banished, but never forgotten. He asked the Poet Valmiki to restore his wife to him, and he desired that Sita might once more prove her purity in die great assembly, so that he might take her back with the approval of his people. Sita came, but her life had been darkened by an unjust suspicion, her heart was broken, and she invoked the Earth to take her back. And the Earth, which had given Sita birth, yawned and took back her suffering child into her bosom. In the ancient hymns of the Rig Veda, Sita is simply the goddess of the field-furrow which bears crops for men. We find how that simple conception is concealed in the Ramayana, where Sita the heroine of the Epic is still born of the field-furrow, and after all her adventures returns to the earth* To the millions of men and women in India, however, Sita is not an allegory; she lives in their hearts and affections as the model of womanly love, womanly devotion, and a wife's noble self-abnegation. The portions translated in this Book form the whole or portions of Sections xcii., xciii., xciv., and xcvii. of Book vii. of the original text. The Sacrifice j Years have passed ; the lonely Rama in his joyless palace reigned, And for righteous duty yearning, Asiva-medha rite ordained, And a steed of darkest sable with the valiant Lakahman sent, And with troops and faithful courtiers to Naimisha's forest went. Fair was far Naimisha's forest by the limpid Gumti's shore, Monarchs came and warlike chieftains, Brahmans versed in sacred lore, , SACRIFICE OF THE HORSE 173 Bharat with each friend and kinsman served them with the choicest food, Proud retainers by each chieftain and each crowned monarch stood. Palaces and stately mansions were for royal guests assigned, Peaceful homes for learned Brahmans were with trees umbrageous lined, Gifts were made unto the needy, cloth by skilful weavers wrought, Ere the suppliants spake their wishes, ere they shaped their inmost thought ! Rice unto the helpless widow, to the orphan wealth and gold, Gifts they gave to holy Brahmans, shelter to the weak and old, Garments to the grateful people crowding by their monarch's door, Pood and drink unto the hungry, home unto the orphan poor. Ancient rtshis had not witnessed feast like this in any land, bright Immortals in their bounty blest not with a kinder hand, Through the year and circling seasons lasted Rama's sacred feast, knd the untold wealth of Rama by his kindly gifts increased ! II Valmiki and His Pupils ■oremost midst the gathered Sages to the holy yajna came deathless Bard of Lay Immortal — Saint Valmiki rich in fame, ilidst the humble homes of rbbu, on the confines of the wood, *ottage of the Saint Valmiki in the shady garden stood. rruits and berries from the jungle, water from the crystal spring, RTith a careful hand Valmiki did unto his cottage bring, And he spake to gentle Lava, Kusa child of righteous fame, — Sita's sons, as youthful hermits to the sacred feast they came : 174 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA "Lift your voices, righteous pupils, and your richest music lend, Sing the Lay of Ramayana from the first unto the end, Sing it to the holy Brahman, to the warrior fair and tall, In the crowded street and pathway, in the monarch's palace hall, Sing it by the door of Rama, — he ordains this mighty feast, Sing it to the royal ladies, — they shall to the story list, Sing from day to day unwearied, in this sacrificial site, Chant to all the gathered nations Rama's deeds of matchless might, And this store of fruits and berries will allay your thirst and toil, Gentle children of the forest, unknown strangers in this soil ! Twenty cantos of the Epic, morn to night, recite each day, Till from end to end is chanted Ramayana9 s deathless Lay, Ask no alms, receive no riches, nor of your misfortunes tell, Useless unto us is bounty who in darksome forests dwell, Children of the wood and mountain, cruel fortune clouds your birth, Stainless virtue be your shelter, virtue be your wealth on earth ! If the royal Rama questions and your lineage seeks to know, Say, — Valmiki is our Teacher and our Sire on earth below, Wake your harps to notes of rapture and your softest accents lend, With the music of the poet music of your voices blend, j Bow unto the mighty monarch, bow to Rama fair and tall, He is father of his subjects, he is lord of creatures all ! " SACRIFICE OF THE HOBSE 17$ III Recital of the Ramayana When the silent night was ended, and their pure ablutions done, Joyous went the minstrel brothers, and their lofty lay begun, Rama to the hermit minstrels lent a monarch's willing ear, Blended with the simple music dulcet was the lay to hear, And so sweet the chanted accents, Rama's inmost soul was stirred, With his royal guests and courtiers still the deathless lay he heard ! Heralds versed in old Puranas, Brahmans skilled in pious rite, Minstrels deep in lore of music, poets fired by heavenly might, Watchers of the constellations, min'sters of the festive day, Men of science and of logic, bards who sang the ancient lay, Painters skilled and merry dancers who the festive joy prolong, Hushed and silent in their wonder listed to the Wondrous song ! And as poured the flood of music through the bright and live-long day, Eyes and ears and hearts insatiate drank the nectar of the lay, And the eager people whispered : " See the boys, how like our king, As two drops of limpid water from the parent bubble spring ! Were the boys no hermit- children, in the hermit's garments clad, We would deem them Rami's image, — Rama as a youthful lad ! " Twenty cantos of the Epic thus the youthful minstrels sung, And the voice of stringed music through the. Epic rolled along, Out spake Rama in his wonder : " Scarce I know who these may be, Eighteen thousand golden pieces be the children-minstrels' fee ! " 1*6 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA l " Not so," answered thus the children, " we in darksome forests dwell, Gold and silrer, bounteous monarch, forest life beseem not well ! " " Noble children ! " uttered Rama, " dear to me the words you say, Tell me who composed this Epic, — Father of this deathless Lay ? " 1 " Saint Valmiki" stake the minstrels, "framed the great Immortal song, | Four and twenty thousand verses to this noble Lay belong, . ' Untold tales of deathless virtue sanctify his sacred line, And five hundred glorious cantos in this glorious Epic shine, In six Boots of mighty splendour was the poet's task begun, With a seventh Book supplemental, is the poet's labour done, All thy matchless deeds, 0 monarch, in tins Lay will brighter shine, I List to us from first to ending if thy royal heart incline I9' J " Be it so," thus Rama answered, but the hours of day were o'er, i And Valmiki's youthful pupils to their cottage came once more. Rama with his guests and courtiers slowly left the royal hall, Eager was his heart to listen, eager were the monarchs all, And the Yoke of song and music thus was lifted day to day, And from day to day they listened to Valmiki's deathless Lay 1 IV Lava and Kusa Recognised Flashed upon the contrite Rama glimpses of the dawning truth, And with tears of lore paternal Rama clasped each minstrel youth, Yearned his sorrow-stricken bosom for his pure and peerless dame, Sita banished to the forest, stainless in her righteous feme ! SACRIFICE OF THE HORSE 177 In his tears repentant Rama to Valmiki message sent, That his heart with eager longing sought her from her banishment : " Pore in soul ! before these monarchs may she yet her virtue prove, Grace once more my throne and kingdom, share my unforgotten lore, Pure in soul ! before my subjects may her truth and rirtue shine, Queen of Rama's heart and empire may she once again be mine ! " Sita Lost Morning dawned ; and with Valmiki, Sita to the gathering came, Banished wife and weeping mother, sorrow-stricken, suffering dame, Pure in thought and deed, Valmiki, gave his troth and plighted word, — Faithful still the banished Sita in her bosom held her lord ! " Mighty Saint," so Rama answered as he bowed his humbled head, " Listening world will hear thy mandate and the word that thou hast said, Never in his bosom Rama questioned Sita's faithful love, And the God of Fire incarnate did her stainless virtue prove ! Pardon, if the voice of rumour drove me to a deed of shame, Bowing to my people's wishes I disowned my sinless dame, Pardon, if to please my subjects I have bade my Sita roam, Tore her from my throne and empire, tore her from my heart and home! - , In the dark and dreary forest was my Sita left to mourn, In the lone and gloomy jungle were my royal children born, Help me, Gods, to wipe this error and this deed of sinful pride, May my Sita prove her virtue, be again my loving bride I " 178 THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA Gods and Spirits, bright Immortals to that royal Tajna came, Men of every race and nation, king* and chiefs of righteous fame, Softly through the halls of splendour cool and scented breezes blew, Fragrance of celestial blossoms o'er the royal chambers flew. Sita saw the bright Celestials, monarchs gathered from afar, Saw her royal lord and husband bright as heaven-ascending star, Saw her sons as hermit- minstrels beaming with a radiance high, Milk of love suffused her bosom, tear of sorrow filled her eye ! Rama's queen and Janak's daughter, will she stoop her cause to plead, Witness of her truth and virtue can a loving woman need ? Oh ! her woman's heart is bursting, and her day on earth is done, And she pressed her heaving bosom, slow and sadly thus begun : " If unstained in thought and action I have lived from day of birth > Spare a daughter's shame and anguish and receive hery Mother Earth / If in duty and devotion I have laboured undefiled, Mother Earth I who bore this woman , once again receive thy child 7 If in truth unto my husband I have proved a faithful wife. Mother Earth / relieve thy Sita from the burden of this life!79 Then the earth was rent and parted, and a golden throne arose, Held aloft by jewelled Nagas as the leaves enfold the rose, And the Mother in embraces held her spotless sinless Child, Saintly Janak's saintly daughter, pure and true and undefiled, Gods and men proclaim her virtue ! But fair Sita is no more, Lone is Rama's loveless bosom and his days of bliss are o'er ! J CONCLUSION T N the concluding portion of the Uttara or Supplemental Book, the descendants of Rama and his brothers are described as the founders of the great cities and kingdoms which flourished in Western India in the fourth and fifth centuries before the Chris- tian Era. Bharat had two sons, Taksha and Pushkala. The former founded Taksha- sila, to the east of the Indus, and known to Alexander and the Greeks as Taxila. The latter founded Pushkala-yati, to the west of the Indus, and known to Alexander and the Greeks as Peukelaotis. Thus the sons of Bharat are said to have founded kingdoms which flourished on either side of the Indus river in the fourth century before Christ. Lakshman had two sons, Angada and Chandraketu. The former founded the kingdom of Karupada, and the latter founded the city of Chandrakanti in the Malwa country. Satrughna had two sons, Suvahu and Satrughati. The former became king of Mathura, and the latter ruled in Vidisha. Rama had two sons, Lava and Kusa. The former ruled in Sravasti, which was the capital of Oudh at the time of the Buddha in the fifth and sixth centuries before Christ. The latter founded Kusavati at the foot of the Vindhya mountains. The death of Rama and his brothers was in accordance with Hindu ideas of the death of the righteous. Lakshman died under somewhat peculiar circumstances. A messenger from heaven sought a secret conference with Rama, and Rama placed Lakshman at the gate, with strict injunctions that whoever intruded on the private conference should be slain. Lakshman himself had to disturb the conference by the solicitation of the celestial r'uhi Durvasa, who i8o THE EPIC OF RAMA, PRINCE OF INDIA always appears on earth to create mischief. And true to the orders passed by Rama, he surrendered his life by penances, and went to heaven. In the fulness of time, Rama and his other brothers left Ayodhya, crossed the Sarayu, surrendered their mortal life, and entered heareo.
